<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Christmas Day at Kirkby Cottage</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="christmas-day-at-kirkby-cottage" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Christmas Day at Kirkby Cottage</h2>
			<section id="christmas-day-at-kirkby-cottage-chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">What Maurice Archer Said About Christmas</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>“After all, Christmas is a bore!”</p>
				<p>“Even though you should think so, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer, pray do not say so here.”</p>
				<p>“But it is.”</p>
				<p>“I am very sorry that you should feel like that; but pray do not say anything so very horrible.”</p>
				<p>“Why not? and why is it horrible? You know very well what I mean.”</p>
				<p>“I do not want to know what you mean; and it would make papa very unhappy if he were to hear you.”</p>
				<p>“A great deal of beef is roasted, and a great deal of pudding is boiled, and then people try to be jolly by eating more than usual. The consequence is, they get very sleepy, and want to go to bed an hour before the proper time. That’s Christmas.”</p>
				<p>He who made this speech was a young man about twenty-three years old, and the other personage in the dialogue was a young lady, who might be, perhaps, three years his junior. The “papa” to whom the lady had alluded was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Lownd, parson of Kirkby Cliffe, in Craven, and the scene was the parsonage library, as pleasant a little room as you would wish to see, in which the young man who thought Christmas to be a bore was at present sitting over the fire, in the parson’s armchair, with a novel in his hand, which he had been reading till he was interrupted by the parson’s daughter. It was nearly time for him to dress for dinner, and the young lady was already dressed. She had entered the room on the pretext of looking for some book or paper, but perhaps her main object may have been to ask for some assistance from Maurice Archer in the work of decorating the parish church. The necessary ivy and holly branches had been collected, and the work was to be performed on the morrow. The day following would be Christmas Day. It must be acknowledged, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer had not accepted the proposition made to him very graciously.</p>
				<p>Maurice Archer was a young man as to whose future career in life many of his elder friends shook their heads and expressed much fear. It was not that his conduct was dangerously bad, or that he spent his money too fast, but that he was abominably conceited, so said these elder friends; and then there was the unfortunate fact of his being altogether beyond control. He had neither father, nor mother, nor uncle, nor guardian. He was the owner of a small property not far from Kirkby Cliffe, which gave him an income of some six or seven hundred a year, and he had altogether declined any of the professions which had been suggested to him. He had, in the course of the year now coming to a close, taken his degree at Oxford, with some academical honours, which were not high enough to confer distinction, and had already positively refused to be ordained, although, would he do so, a small living would be at his disposal on the death of a septuagenarian cousin. He intended, he said, to farm a portion of his own land, and had already begun to make amicable arrangements for buying up the interest of one of his two tenants. The rector of Kirkby Cliffe, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Lownd, had been among his father’s dearest friends, and he was now the parson’s guest for the Christmas. There had been many doubts in the parsonage before the young man had been invited. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had considered that the visit would be dangerous. Their family consisted of two daughters, the youngest of whom was still a child; but Isabel was turned twenty, and if a young man were brought into the house, would it not follow, as a matter of course, that she should fall in love with him? That was the mother’s first argument. “Young people don’t always fall in love,” said the father. “But people will say that he is brought here on purpose,” said the mother, using her second argument. The parson, who in family matters generally had his own way, expressed an opinion that if they were to be governed by what other people might choose to say, their course of action would be very limited indeed. As for his girl, he did not think she would ever give her heart to any man before it had been asked; and as for the young man⁠—whose father had been for over thirty years his dearest friend⁠—if he chose to fall in love, he must run his chance, like other young men. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd declared he knew nothing against him, except that he was, perhaps, a little was self-willed; and so Maurice Archer came to Kirkby Cliffe, intending to spend two months in the same house with Isabel Lownd.</p>
				<p>Hitherto, as far as the parents or the neighbours saw⁠—and in their endeavours to see, the neighbours were very diligent⁠—there had been no lovemaking. Between Mabel, the young daughter, and Maurice, there had grown up a violent friendship⁠—so much so, that Mabel, who fourteen, declared that Maurice Archer was “the jolliest person” in the world. She called him Maurice, as did <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd; and to Maurice, of course, she was Mabel. But between Isabel and Maurice it was always Miss Lownd and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer, as was proper. It was so, at least, with this difference; that each of them had got into a way of dropping, when possible, the other’s name.</p>
				<p>It was acknowledged throughout Craven⁠—which my readers of course know to be a district in the northern portion of the West Riding of Yorkshire, of which Skipton is the capital⁠—that Isabel Lownd was a very pretty girl. There were those who thought that Mary Manniwick, of Barden, excelled her; and others, again, expressed a preference for Fanny Grange, the pink-cheeked daughter of the surgeon at Giggleswick. No attempt shall here be made to award the palm of superior merit; but it shall be asserted boldly, that no man need desire a prettier girl with whom to fall in love than was Isabel Lownd. She was tall, active, fair, the very picture of feminine health, with bright gray eyes, a perfectly beautiful nose⁠—as is common to almost all girls belonging to Craven⁠—a mouth by no means delicately small, but eager, eloquent, and full of spirit, a well-formed short chin, with a dimple, and light brown hair, which was worn plainly smoothed over her brows, and fell in short curls behind her head. Of Maurice Archer it cannot be said that he was handsome. He had a snub nose; and a man so visaged can hardly be good-looking, though a girl with a snub nose may be very pretty. But he was a well-made young fellow, having a look of power about him, with dark-brown hair, cut very short, close shorn, with clear but rather small blue eyes, and an expression of countenance which allowed no one for a moment to think that he was weak in character, or a fool. His own place, called Hundlewick Hall, was about five miles from the parsonage. He had been there four or five times a week since his arrival at Kirkby Cliffe, and had already made arrangements for his own entrance upon the land in the following September. If a marriage were to come of it, the arrangement would be one very comfortable for the father and mother at Kirkby Cliffe. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had already admitted much as that to herself, though she still trembled for her girl. Girls are so prone to lose their hearts, whereas the young men of these days are so very cautious and hard! That, at least, was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd’s idea of girls and young men; and even at this present moment she was hardly happy about her child. Maurice, she was sure, had spoken never a word that might not have been proclaimed from the church tower; but her girl, she thought, was not quite the same as she had been before the young man had come among them. She was somewhat less easy in her manner, more preoccupied, and seemed to labour under a conviction that the presence in the house of Maurice Archer must alter the nature of her life. Of course it had altered the nature of her life, and of course she thought a great deal of Maurice Archer.</p>
				<p>It had been chiefly at Mabel’s instigation that Isabel had invited the cooperation of her father’s visitor in the adornment of the church for Christmas Day. Isabel had expressed her opinion that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer didn’t care a bit about such things, but Mabel declared that she had already extracted a promise from him. “He’ll do anything I ask him,” said Mabel, proudly. Isabel, however, had not cared to undertake the work in such company, simply under her sister’s management, and had proffered the request herself. Maurice had not declined the task⁠—had indeed promised his assistance in some indifferent fashion⁠—but had accompanied his promise by a suggestion that Christmas was a bore! Isabel had rebuked him, and then he had explained. But his explanation, in Isabel’s view of the case, only made the matter worse. Christmas to her was a very great affair indeed⁠—a festival to which the roast beef and the plum pudding were, no doubt, very necessary; but not by any means the essence, as he had chosen to consider them. Christmas a bore! No; a man who thought Christmas to be a bore should never be more to her than a mere acquaintance. She listened to his explanation, and then left the room, almost indignantly. Maurice, when she had gone, looked after her, and then read a page of his novel; but he was thinking of Isabel, and not of the book. It was quite true that he had never said a word to her that might not have been declared from the church tower; but, nevertheless, he had thought about her a good deal. Those were days on which he was sure that he was in love with her, and would make her his wife. Then there came days on which he ridiculed himself for the idea. And now and then there was a day on which he asked himself whether he was sure that she would take him were he to ask her. There was sometimes an air with her, some little trick of the body, a manner of carrying her head when in his presence, which he was not physiognomist enough to investigate, but which in some way suggested doubts to him. It was on such occasions as this that he was most in love with her and now she had left the room with that particular motion of her head which seemed almost to betoken contempt.</p>
				<p>“If you mean to do anything before dinner you’d better do it at once,” said the parson, opening the door. Maurice jumped up, and in ten minutes was dressed and down in the dining-room. Isabel was there, but did not greet him. “You’ll come and help us tomorrow,” said Mabel, taking him by the arm and whispering to him.</p>
				<p>“Of course I will,” said Maurice.</p>
				<p>“And you won’t go to Hundlewick again till after Christmas?”</p>
				<p>“It won’t take up the whole day to put up the holly.”</p>
				<p>“Yes it will⁠—to do it nicely⁠—and nobody ever does any work the day before Christmas.”</p>
				<p>“Except the cook,” suggested Maurice. Isabel, who heard the words, assumed that look of which he was already afraid, but said not a word. Then dinner was announced, and he gave his arm to the parson’s wife.</p>
				<p>Not a word was said about Christmas that evening. Isabel had threatened the young man with her father’s displeasure on account of his expressed opinion as to the festival being a bore, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd was not himself one who talked a great deal about any Church festival. Indeed, it may be doubted whether his more enthusiastic daughter did not in her heart think him almost too indifferent on the subject. In the decorations of the church he, being an elderly man, and one with other duties to perform, would of course take no part. When the day came he would preach, no doubt, an appropriate sermon, would then eat his own roast beef and pudding with his ordinary appetite, would afterwards, if allowed to do so, sink into his armchair behind his book⁠—and then, for him, Christmas would be over. In all this there was no disrespect for the day, but it was hardly an enthusiastic observance. Isabel desired to greet the morning of her Saviour’s birth with some special demonstration of joy. Perhaps from year to year she was somewhat disappointed, but never before had it been hinted to her that Christmas was a bore.</p>
				<p>On the following morning the work was to be commenced immediately after breakfast. The same thing had been done so often at Kirkby Cliffe, that the rector was quite used to it. David Drum, the clerk, who was also schoolmaster, and Barty Crossgrain, the parsonage gardener, would devote their services to the work in hand throughout the whole day, under the direction of Isabel. Mabel would of course, be there assisting, as would also two daughters of a neighbouring farmer. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd would go down to the church about eleven, and stay till one, when the whole party would come up to the parsonage for refreshment. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd would not return to the work, but the others would remain there till it was finished, which finishing was never accomplished till candles had been burned in the church for a couple of hours. Then there would be more refreshments; but on this special day the parsonage dinner was never comfortable and orderly. The rector bore it all with good humour, but no one could say that he was enthusiastic in the matter. Mabel, who delighted in going up ladders, and leaning over the pulpit, and finding herself in all those odd parts of the church to which her imagination would stray during her father’s sermons, but which were ordinarily inaccessible to her, took great delight in the work. And perhaps Isabel’s delight had commenced with similar feelings. Immediately after breakfast, which was much hurried on the occasion, she put on her hat and hurried down to the church, without a word to Maurice on the subject. There was another whisper from Mabel, which was answered also with a whisper, and then Mabel also went. Maurice took up his novel, and seated himself comfortably by the parlour fire.</p>
				<p>But again he did not read a word. Why had Isabel made herself so disagreeable, and why had she perked up her head as she left the room in that self-sufficient way, as though she was determined to show him that she did not want his assistance? Of course, she had understood well enough that he had not intended to say that the ceremonial observance of the day was a bore. He had spoken of the beef and the pudding, and she had chosen to pretend to misunderstand him. He would not go near the church. And as for his love, and his half-formed resolution to make her his wife, he would get over it altogether. If there were one thing more fixed with him than another, it was that on no consideration would he marry a girl who should give herself airs. Among them they might decorate the church as they pleased, and when he should see their handywork⁠—as he would do, of course, during the service of Christmas Day⁠—he would pass it by without a remark. So resolving, he again turned over a page or two of his novel, and then remembered that he was bound, at any rate, to keep his promise to his friend Mabel. Assuring himself that it was on that plea that he went, and on no other, he sauntered down to the church.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="christmas-day-at-kirkby-cottage-chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Kirkby Cliffe Church</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Kirkby Cliffe Church stands close upon the River Wharfe, about a quarter of a mile from the parsonage, which is on a steep hillside running down from the moors to the stream. A prettier little church or graveyard you shall hardly find in England. Here, no large influx of population has necessitated the removal of the last home of the parishioners from beneath the shelter of the parish church. Every inhabitant of Kirkby Cliffe has, when dead, the privilege of rest among those green hillocks. Within the building is still room for tablets commemorative of the rectors and their wives and families, for there are none others in the parish to whom such honour is accorded. Without the walls, here and there, stand the tombstones of the farmers; while the undistinguished graves of the peasants lie about in clusters which, solemn though they be, are still picturesque. The church itself is old, and may probably be doomed before long to that kind of destruction which is called restoration; but hitherto it has been allowed to stand beneath all its weight of ivy, and has known but little change during the last two hundred years. Its old oak pews, and ancient exalted reading-desk and pulpit are offensive to many who come to see the spot; but Isabel Lownd is of opinion that neither the one nor the other could be touched, in the way of change, without profanation.</p>
				<p>In the very porch Maurice Archer met Mabel, with her arms full of ivy branches, attended by David Drum. “So you have come at last, Master Maurice?” she said.</p>
				<p>“Come at last! Is that all the thanks I get? Now let me see what it is you’re going to do. Is your sister here?”</p>
				<p>“Of course she is. Barty is up in the pulpit, sticking holly branches round the sounding-board, and she is with him.”</p>
				<p>“T’ boorde’s that rotten an’ maaky, it’ll be doon on Miss Is’bel’s heede, an’ Barty Crossgrain ain’t more than or’nary saft-handed,” said the clerk.</p>
				<p>They entered the church, and there it was, just as Mabel had said. The old gardener was standing on the rail of the pulpit, and Isabel was beneath, handing up to him nails and boughs, and giving him directions as to their disposal. “Naa, miss, naa; it wonot do that away,” said Barty. “Thou’ll ha’ me o’er on to t’stanes⁠—thou wilt, that a-gait. Lard-a-mussy, miss, thou munnot clim’ up, or thou’lt be doon, and brek thee banes, thee ull!” So saying, Barty Crossgrain, who had contented himself with remonstrating when called upon by his young mistress to imperil his own neck, jumped on to the floor of the pulpit and took hold of the young lady by both her ankles. As he did so, he looked up at her with anxious eyes, and steadied himself on his own feet, as though it might become necessary for him to perform some great feat of activity. All this Maurice Archer saw, and Isabel saw that he saw it. She was not well pleased at knowing that he should see her in that position, held by the legs by the old gardener, and from which she could only extricate herself by putting her hand on the old man’s neck as she jumped down from her perch. But she did jump down, and then began to scold Crossgrain, as though the awkwardness had come from fault of his.</p>
				<p>“I’ve come to help, in spite of the hard words you said to me yesterday, Miss Lownd,” said Maurice, standing on the lower steps of the pulpit. “Couldn’t I get up and do the things at the top?” But Isabel thought that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer could not get up and “do the things at the top.” The wood was so far decayed that they must abandon the idea of ornamenting the sounding-board, and so both Crossgrain and Isabel descended into the body of the church.</p>
				<p>Things did not go comfortably with them for the next hour. Isabel had certainly invited his cooperation, and therefore could not tell him to go away; and yet, such was her present feeling towards him, she could not employ him profitably, and with ease to herself. She was somewhat angry with him, and more angry with herself. It was not only that she had spoken hard words to him, as he had accused her of doing, but that, after the speaking of the hard words, she had been distant and cold in her manner to him. And yet he was so much to her! she liked him so well!⁠—and though she had never dreamed of admitting to herself that she was in love with him, yet⁠—yet it would be so pleasant to have the opportunity of asking herself whether she could not love him, should he ever give her a fair and open opportunity of searching her own heart on the matter. There had now sprung up some half-quarrel between them, and it was impossible that it could be set aside by any action on her part. She could not be otherwise than cold and haughty in her demeanour to him. Any attempt at reconciliation must come from him, and the longer that she continued to be cold and haughty, the less chance there was that it would come. And yet she knew that she had been right to rebuke him for what he had said. “Christmas a bore!” She would rather lose his friendship forever than hear such words from his mouth, without letting nim know what she thought of them. Now he was there with her, and his coming could not but be taken as a sign of repentance. Yet she could not soften her manners to him, and become intimate with him, and playful, as had been her wont. He was allowed to pull about the masses of ivy, and to stick up branches of holly here and there at discretion; but what he did was done under Mabel’s direction, and not under hers⁠—with the aid of one of the farmer’s daughters, and not with her aid. In silence she continued to work round the chancel and communion-table, with Crossgrain, while Archer, Mabel, and David Drum used their taste and diligence in the nave and aisles of the little church. Then <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd came among them, and things went more easily; but hardly a word had been spoken between Isabel and Maurice when, after sundry hints from David Drum as to the lateness of the hour, they left the church and went up to the parsonage for their luncheon.</p>
				<p>Isabel stoutly walked on first, as though determined to show that she had no other idea in her head but that of reaching the parsonage as quickly as possible. Perhaps Maurice Archer had the same idea, for he followed her. Then he soon found that he was so far in advance of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd and the old gardener as to be sure of three minutes’ uninterrupted conversation; for Mabel remained with her mother, making earnest supplication as to the expenditure of certain yards of green silk tape, which she declared to be necessary for the due performance of the work which they had in hand. “Miss Lownd,” said Maurice, “I think you are a little hard upon me.”</p>
				<p>“In what way, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer?”</p>
				<p>“You asked me to come down to the church, and you haven’t spoken to me all the time I was there.”</p>
				<p>“I asked you to come and work, not to talk,” she said.</p>
				<p>“You asked me to come and work with you.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t think that I said any such thing; and you came at Mabel’s request, and not at mine. When I asked you, you told me it was all⁠—a bore. Indeed you said much worse than that. I certainly did not mean to ask you again. Mabel asked you, and you came to oblige her. She talked to you, for I heard her; and I was half disposed to tell her not to laugh so much, and to remember that she was in church.”</p>
				<p>“I did not laugh, Miss Lownd.”</p>
				<p>“I was not listening especially to you.”</p>
				<p>“Confess, now,” he said, after a pause; “don’t you know that you misinterpreted me yesterday, and that you took what I said in a different spirit from my own.”</p>
				<p>“No; I do not know it.”</p>
				<p>“But you did. I was speaking of the holiday part of Christmas, which consists of pudding and beef, and is surely subject to ridicule, if one chooses to ridicule pudding and beef. You answered me as though I had spoken slightingly of the religious feeling which belongs to the day.”</p>
				<p>“You said that the whole thing was⁠—; I won’t repeat the word. Why should pudding and beef be a bore to you, when it is prepared as a sign that there shall be plenty on that day for people who perhaps don’t have plenty on any other day of the year? The meaning of it is, that you don’t like it all, because that which gives unusual enjoyment to poor people, who very seldom have any pleasure, is tedious to you. I don’t like you for feeling it to be tedious. There! that’s the truth. I don’t mean to be uncivil, but⁠—”</p>
				<p>“You are very uncivil.”</p>
				<p>“What am I to say, when you come and ask me?”</p>
				<p>“I do not well know how you could be more uncivil, Miss Lownd. Of course it is the commonest thing in the world, that one person should dislike another. It occurs every day, and people know it of each other. I can perceive very well that you dislike me, and I have no reason to be angry with you for disliking me. You have a right to dislike me, if your mind runs that way. But it is very unusual for one person to tell another so to his face⁠—and more unusual to say so to a guest.” Maurice Archer, as he said this, spoke with a degree of solemnity to which she was not at all accustomed, so that she became frightened at what she had said. And not only was she frightened, but very unhappy also. She did not quite know whether she had or had not told him plainly that she disliked him, but she was quite sure that she had not intended to do so. She had been determined to scold him⁠—to let him see that, however much of real friendship there might be between them, she would speak her mind plainly, if he offended her; but she certainly had not desired to give him cause for lasting wrath against her. “However,” continued Maurice, “perhaps the truth is best after all, though it is so very unusual to hear such truths spoken.”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t mean to be uncivil,” stammered Isabel.</p>
				<p>“But you meant to be true?”</p>
				<p>“I meant to say what I felt about Christmas Day.” Then she paused a moment. “If I have offended you, I beg your pardon.”</p>
				<p>He looked at her and saw that her eyes were full of tears, and his heart was at once softened towards her. Should he say a word to her, to let her know that there was⁠—or, at any rate, that henceforth there should be no offence? But it occurred to him that if he did so, that word would mean so much, and would lead perhaps to the saying of other words, which ought not to be shown without forethought. And now, too, they were within the parsonage gate, and there was no time for speaking. “You will go down again after lunch?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know;⁠—not if I can help it. Here’s papa.” She had begged his pardon⁠—had humbled herself before him. And he had not said a word in acknowledgment of the grace she had done him. She almost thought that she did dislike him⁠—really dislike him. Of course he had known what she meant, and he had chosen to misunderstand her and to take her, as it were, at an advantage. In her difficulty she had abjectly apologized to him, and he had not even deigned to express himself as satisfied with what she had done. She had known him to be conceited and masterful; but that, she had thought, she could forgive, believing it to be the common way with men⁠—imagining, perhaps, that a man was only the more worthy of love on account of such fault; but now she found that he was ungenerous also, and deficient in that chivalry without which a man can hardly appear at advantage in a woman’s eyes. She went on into the house, merely touching her father’s arm, as she passed him, and hurried up to her own room. “Is there anything wrong with Isabel?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd.</p>
				<p>“She has worked too hard, I think, and is tired,” said Maurice.</p>
				<p>Within ten minutes they were all assembled in the dining-room, and Mabel was loud in her narrative of the doings of the morning. Barty Crossgrain and David Drum had both declared the sounding-board to be so old that it mustn’t even be touched, and she was greatly afraid that it would tumble down some day and “squash papa” in the pulpit. The rector ridiculed the idea of any such disaster; and then there came a full description of the morning’s scene, and of Barty’s fears lest Isabel should “brek her banes.” “His own wig was almost off,” said Mabel, “and he gave Isabel such a lug by the leg that she very nearly had to jump into his arms.”</p>
				<p>“I didn’t do anything of the kind,” said Isabel.</p>
				<p>“You had better leave the sounding-board alone,” said the parson.</p>
				<p>“We have left it alone, papa,” said Isabel, with great dignity. “There are some other things that can’t be done this year.” For Isabel was becoming tired of her task, and would not have returned to the church at all could she have avoided it.</p>
				<p>“What other things?” demanded Mabel, who was as enthusiastic as ever. “We can finish all the rest. Why shouldn’t we finish it? We are ever so much more forward than we were last year, when David and Barty went to dinner. We’ve finished the Granby-Moor pew, and we never used to get to that till after luncheon.” But Mabel on this occasion had all the enthusiasm to herself. The two farmer’s daughters, who had been brought up to the parsonage as usual, never on such occasions uttered a word. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had completed her part of the work; Maurice could not trust himself to speak on the subject; and Isabel was dumb. Luncheon, however, was soon over, and something must be done. The four girls of course returned to their labours, but Maurice did not go with them, nor did he make any excuse for not doing so.</p>
				<p>“I shall walk over to Hundlewick before dinner,” he said, as soon as they were all moving. The rector suggested that he would hardly be back in time. “Oh, yes; ten miles⁠—two hours and a half; and I shall have two hours there besides. I must see what they are doing with our own church, and how they mean to keep Christmas there. I’m not quite sure that I shan’t go over there again tomorrow.” Even Mabel felt that there was something wrong, and said not a word in opposition to this wicked desertion.</p>
				<p>He did walk to Hundlewick and back again, and when at Hundlewick he visited the church, though the church was a mile beyond his own farm. And he added something to the store provided for the beef and pudding of those who lived upon his own land; but of this he said nothing on his return to Kirkby Cliffe. He walked his dozen miles, and saw what was being done about the place, and visited the cottages of some who knew him, and yet was back at the parsonage in time for dinner. And during his walk he turned many things over in his thoughts, and endeavoured to make up his mind on one or two points. Isabel had never looked so pretty as when she jumped down into the pulpit, unless it was when she was begging his pardon for her want of courtesy to him. And though she had been, as he described it to himself, “rather down upon him,” in regard to what he had said of Christmas, did he not like her the better for having an opinion of her own? And then, as he had stood for a few minutes leaning on his own gate, and looking at his own house at Hundlewick, it had occurred to him that he could hardly live there without a companion. After that he had walked back again, and was dressed for dinner, and in the drawing-room before any one of the family.</p>
				<p>With poor Isabel the afternoon had gone much less satisfactorily. She found that she almost hated her work, that she really had a headache, and that she could put no heart into what she was doing. She was cross to Mabel, and almost surly to David Drum and Barty Crossgrain. The two farmer’s daughters were allowed to do almost what they pleased with the holly branches⁠—a state of things which was most unusual⁠—and then Isabel, on her return to the parsonage, declared her intention of going to bed! <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd, who had never before known her to do such a thing, was perfectly shocked. Go to bed, and not come down the whole of Christmas Eve! But Isabel was resolute. With a bad headache would be better in bed than up. Were she to attempt to shake it off, she would be ill the next day, She did not want anything to eat, and would not take anything. No; she would not have any tea, but would go to bed at once. And to bed she went.</p>
				<p>She was thoroughly discontented with herself, and felt that Maurice had, as it were, made up his mind against her forever.</p>
				<p>She hardly knew whether to be angry with herself or with him; but she did know very well that she had not intended really to quarrel with him. Of course she had been in earnest in what she had said; but he had taken her words as signifying so much more than she had intended! If he chose to quarrel with her, of course he must; but a friend could not, she was sure, care for her a great deal who would really be angry with her for such a trifle. Of course this friend did pot care for her at all⁠—not the least, or he would not treat her so savagely. He had been quite savage to her, and she hated him for it. And yet she hated herself almost more. What right could she have had first to scold him, and then to tell him to his face that she disliked him? Of course he had gone away to Hundlewick. She would not have been a bit surprised if he had stayed there and never come back again. But he did come back, and she hated herself as she heard their voices as they all went in to dinner without her. It seemed to her that his voice was more cheery than ever. Last night and all the morning he had been silent and almost sullen, but now, the moment that she was away, he could talk and be full of spirits. She heard Mabel’s ringing laughter downstairs, and she almost hated Mabel. It seemed to her that everybody was gay and happy because she was upstairs in her bed, and ill. Then there came a peal of laughter. She was glad that she was upstairs in bed, and ill. Nobody would have laughed, nobody would have been gay, had she been there. Maurice Archer liked them all, except her⁠—she was sure of that. And what could be more natural after her conduct to him? She had taken upon herself to lecture him, and of course he had not chosen to endure it. But of one thing she was quite sure, as she lay there, wretched in her solitude⁠—that now she would never alter her demeanour to him. He had chosen to be cold to ber, and she would be like frozen ice to him. Again and again she heard their voices, and then, sobbing on her pillow, she fell asleep.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="christmas-day-at-kirkby-cottage-chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Showing How Isabel Lownd Told a Lie</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>On the following morning⁠—Christmas morning⁠—when she woke, her headache was gone, and she was able, as she dressed, to make some stern resolutions. The ecstasy of her sorrow was over, and she could see how foolish she had been to grieve as she had grieved. After all, what had she lost, or what harm bad she done? She had never fancied that the young man was her lover, and she had never wished⁠—so she now told herself⁠—that he should become her lover. If one thing was plainer to ber than another, it was this⁠—that they two were not fitted for each other. She had sometimes whispered to berself, that if she were to marry at all, she would fain marry a clergyman. Now, no man could be more unlike a clergyman than Maurice Archer. He was, she thought, irreverent, and at no pains to keep his want of reverence out of sight, even in that house. He had said that Christmas was a bore, which, to her thinking, was abominable. Was she so poor a creature as to go to bed and cry for a man who had given her no sign that he even liked her, and of whose ways she disapproved so greatly, that even were he to offer her his hand she would certainly refuse it? She consoled herself for the folly of the preceding evening by assuring herself that she had really worked in the church till she was ill, and that she would have gone to bed, and must have gone to bed, had Maurice Archer never been seen or heard of at the parsonage. Other people went to bed when they had headaches, and why should not she? Then she resolved, as she dressed, that there should be no sign of illness, nor bit of ill-humour on her, on this sacred day. She would appear among them all full of mirth and happiness, and would laugh at the attack brought upon her by Barty Crossgrain’s sudden fear in the pulpit; and she would greet Maurice Archer with all possible cordiality, wishing him a merry Christmas as she gave him her hand, and would make him understand in a moment that she had altogether forgotten their mutual bickerings. He should understand that, or should, at least, understand that she willed that it should all be regarded as forgotten. What was he to her, that any thought of him should be allowed to perplex her mind on such a day as this?</p>
				<p>She went downstairs, knowing that she was the first up in the house⁠—the first, excepting the servants. She went into Mabel’s room, and kissing her sister, who was only half awake, wished her many, many, many happy Christmases.</p>
				<p>“Oh, Bell,” said Mabel, “I do so hope you are better!”</p>
				<p>“Of course I am better. Of course I am well. There is nothing for a headache like having twelve hours round of sleep. I don’t know what made me so tired and so bad.”</p>
				<p>“I thought it was something Maurice said,” suggested Mabel.</p>
				<p>“Oh, dear, no. I think Barty had more to do with it than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer. The old fellow frightened me so when he made me think I was falling down. But get up, dear. Papa is in his room, and he’ll be ready for prayers before you.”</p>
				<p>Then she descended to the kitchen, and offered her good wishes to all the servants. To Barty, who always breakfasted there on Christmas mornings, she was especially kind, and said something civil about his work in the church.</p>
				<p>“She’ll ’bout brek her little heart for t’ young mon there, an’ he’s naa true t’ her,” said Barty, as soon as Miss Lownd had closed the kitchen door; showing, perhaps, that he knew more of the matter concerning herself than she did.</p>
				<p>She then went into the parlour to prepare the breakfast, and to put a little present, which she had made for her father, on his plate;⁠—when, whom should she see but Maurice Archer!</p>
				<p>It was a fact known to all the household, and a fact that had not recommended him at all to Isabel, that Maurice never did come downstairs in time for morning prayers. He was always the last; and, though in most respects a very active man, seemed to be almost a sluggard in regard to lying in bed late. As far as she could remember at the moment, he had never been present at prayers a single morning since the first after his arrival at the parsonage, when shame, and a natural feeling of strangeness in the house, had brought him out of his bed. Now he was there half an hour before the appointed time, and during that half-hour she was doomed to be alone with him. But her courage did not for a moment desert her.</p>
				<p>“This is a wonder!” she said, as she took his hand. “You will have a long Christmas Day, but I sincerely hope that it may be a happy one.”</p>
				<p>“That depends on you,” said he.</p>
				<p>“I’ll do everything I can,” she answered. “You shall only have a very little bit of roast beef, and the unfortunate pudding shan’t be brought near you.” Then she looked in his face, and saw that his manner was very serious⁠—almost solemn⁠—and quite unlike his usual ways. “Is anything wrong?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know; I hope not. There are things which one has to say which seem to be so very difficult when the time comes. Miss Lownd, I want you to love me.”</p>
				<p>“What!” She started back as she made the exclamation, as though some terrible proposition had wounded her ears. If she had ever dreamed of his asking for her love, she had dreamed of it as a thing that future days might possibly produce;⁠—when he should be altogether settled at Hundlewick, and when they should have got to know each other intimately by the association of years.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I want you to love me, and to be my wife. I don’t know how to tell you; but I love you better than anything and everything in the world⁠—better than all the world put together. I have done so from the first moment that I saw you; I have. I knew how it would be the very first instant I saw your dear face, and every word you have spoken, and every look out of you look out of your eyes, has made me love you more and more. If I offended you yesterday, I will beg your pardon.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no,” she said.</p>
				<p>“I wish I had bitten my tongue out before I had said what I did about Christmas Day. I do, indeed. I only meant, in a half-joking way, to⁠—to⁠—to⁠—. But I ought to have known you wouldn’t like it, and I beg your pardon. Tell me, Isabel, do you think that you can love me?”</p>
				<p>Not half an hour since she had made up her mind that, even were he to propose to her⁠—which she then knew to be absolutely impossible, she would certainly refuse him. He was not the sort of man for whom she would be a fitting wife; and she had made up her mind also, at the same time, that she did not at all care for him, and that he certainly did not in the least care for her. And now the offer had absolutely been made to her! Then came across her mind an idea that he ought in the first place to have gone to her father; but as to that she was not quite sure. Be that as it might, there he was, and she must give him some answer. As for thinking about it, that was altogether beyond her. The shock to her was too great to allow of her thinking. After some fashion, which afterwards was quite unintelligible to herself, it seemed to her, at that moment, that duty, and maidenly reserve, and filial obedience, all required her to reject him instantly. Indeed, to have accepted him would have been quite beyond her power. “Dear Isabel,” said he, “may I hope that some day you will love me?”</p>
				<p>“Oh! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Archer, don’t,” she said. “Do not ask me.”</p>
				<p>“Why should I not ask you?”</p>
				<p>“It can never be.” This she said quite plainly, and in a voice that seemed to him to settle his fate forever; and yet at the moment her heart was full of love towards him. Though she could not think, she could feel. Of course she loved him. At the very moment in which she was telling him that it could never be, she was elated by an almost ecstatic triumph, as she remembered all her fears, and now knew that the man was at her feet.</p>
				<p>When a girl first receives the homage of a man’s love, and receives it from one whom, whether she loves him or not, she thoroughly respects, her earliest feeling is one of victory⁠—such a feeling as warmed the heart of a conqueror in the Olympian games. He is the spoil of her spear, the fruit of her prowess, the quarry brought down by her own bow and arrow. She, too, by some power of her own which she is hitherto quite unable to analyze, has stricken a man to the very heart, so as to compel him for the moment to follow wherever she may lead him. So it was with Isabel Lownd as she stood there, conscious of the eager gaze which was fixed upon her face, and fully alive to the anxious tones of her lover’s voice. And yet she could only deny him. Afterwards, when she thought of it, she could not imagine why it had been so with her; but, in spite of her great love, she continued to tell herself that there was some obstacle which could never be overcome⁠—or was it that a certain maidenly reserve sat so strong within her bosom that she could not bring herself to own to him that he was dear to her?</p>
				<p>“Never!” exclaimed Maurice, despondently.</p>
				<p>“Oh, no!”</p>
				<p>“But why not? I will be very frank with you, dear. I did think you liked me a little before that affair in the study.” Like him a little! Oh, how she had loved him! She knew it now, and yet not for worlds could she tell him so. “You are not still angry with me, Isabel?”</p>
				<p>“No; not angry.”</p>
				<p>“Why should you say never? Dear Isabel, cannot you try to love me?” Then he attempted to take her hand, but she recoiled at once from his touch, and did feel something of anger against him in that he should thus refuse to take her word. She knew not what it was that she desired of him, but certainly he should not attempt to take her hand, when she told him plainly that she could not love him. A red spot rose to each of her cheeks as again he pressed her. “Do you really mean that you can never, never love me?” She muttered some answer, she knew not what, and then he turned from her, and stood looking out upon the snow which had fallen during the night. She kept her ground for a few seconds, and then escaped through the door, and up to her own bedroom. When once there, she burst out into tears. Could it be possible that she had thrown away forever her own happiness, because she had been too silly to give a true answer to an honest question? And was this the enjoyment and content which she had promised herself for Christmas Day? But surely, surely he would come to her again. If he really loved her as he had declared, if it was true that ever since his arrival at Kirkby Cliffe he had thought of her as his wife, he would not abandon her because in the first tumult of her surprise she had lacked courage to own to him the truth; and then in the midst of her tears there came upon her that delicious recognition of a triumph which, whatever be the victory won, causes such elation to the heart! Nothing, at any rate, could rob her of this⁠—that he had loved her. Then, as a thought suddenly struck her, she ran quickly across the passage, and in a moment was upstairs, telling her tale with her mother’s arm close folded round her waist.</p>
				<p>In the meantime <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd had gone down to the parlour, and had found Maurice still looking out upon the snow. He, too, with some gentle sarcasm, had congratulated the young man on his early rising, as he expressed the ordinary wish of the day. “Yes,” said Maurice, “I had something special to do. Many happy Christmases, sir! I don’t know much about its being happy to me.”</p>
				<p>“Why, what ails you?”</p>
				<p>“It’s a nasty sort of day, isn’t it?” said Maurice.</p>
				<p>“Does that trouble you? I rather like a little snow on Christmas Day. It has a pleasant, old-fashioned look. And there isn’t enough to keep even an old woman at home.”</p>
				<p>“I dare say not,” said Maurice, who was still beating about the bush, having something to tell, but not knowing how to tell it. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd, I should have come to you first, if it hadn’t been for an accident.”</p>
				<p>“Come to me first! What accident?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; only I found Miss Lownd down here this morning, and I asked her to be my wife. You needn’t be unhappy about it, sir. She refused me point blank.”</p>
				<p>“You must have startled her, Maurice. You have startled me, at any rate.”</p>
				<p>“There was nothing of that sort, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd. She took it all very easily. I think she does take things easily.” Poor Isabel! “She just told me plainly that it never could be so, and then she walked out of the room.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t think she expected it, Maurice.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, dear no! I’m quite sure she didn’t. She hadn’t thought about me any more than if I were an old dog. I suppose men do make fools of themselves sometimes. I shall get over it, sir.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I hope so.”</p>
				<p>“I shall give up the idea of living here. I couldn’t do that. I shall probably sell the property, and go to Africa.”</p>
				<p>“Go to Africa!”</p>
				<p>“Well, yes. It’s as good a place as any other, I suppose. It’s wild, and a long way off, and all that kind of thing. As this is Christmas, I had better stay here today, I suppose.”</p>
				<p>“Of course you will.”</p>
				<p>“If you don’t mind, I’ll be off early tomorrow, sir. It’s a kind of thing, you know, that does flurry a man. And then my being here may be disagreeable to her;⁠—not that I suppose she thinks about me any more than if I were an old cow.”</p>
				<p>It need hardly be remarked that the rector was a much older man than Maurice Archer, and that he therefore knew the world much better. Nor was he in love. And he had, moreover, the advantage of a much closer knowledge of the young lady’s character than could be possessed by the lover. And, as it happened, during the last week, he had been fretted by fears expressed by his wife⁠—fears which were altogether opposed to Archer’s present despondency and African resolutions. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had been uneasy⁠—almost more than uneasy⁠—lest poor dear Isabel should be stricken at her heart; whereas, in regard to that young man, she didn’t believe that he cared a bit for her girl. He ought not to have been brought into the house. But he was there, and what could they do? The rector was of opinion that things would come straight⁠—that they would be straightened not by any lover’s propensities on the part of his guest, as to which he protested himself to be altogether indifferent, but by his girl’s good sense. His Isabel would never allow herself to be seriously affected by a regard for a young man who had made no overtures to her. That was the rector’s argument; and perhaps, within his own mind, it was backed by a feeling that, were she so weak, she must stand the consequence. To him it seemed to be an absurd degree of caution that two young people should not be brought together in the same house lest one should fall in love with the other. And he had seen no symptoms of such love. Nevertheless his wife had fretted him, and he had been uneasy. Now the shoe was altogether on the other foot. The young man was the despondent lover, and was asserting that he must go instantly to Africa, because the young lady treated him like an old dog, and thought no more about him than of an old cow.</p>
				<p>A father in such a position can hardly venture to hold out hopes to a lover, even though he may approve of the man as a suitor for his daughter’s hand. He cannot answer for his girl, nor can he very well urge upon a lover the expediency of renewing his suit. In this case <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd did think, that in spite of the cruel, determined obduracy which his daughter was said to have displayed, she might probably be softened by constancy and perseverance. But he knew nothing of the circumstances, and could only suggest that Maurice should not take his place for the first stage on his way to Africa quite at once. “I do not think you need hurry away because of Isabel,” he said, with a gentle smile.</p>
				<p>“I couldn’t stand it⁠—I couldn’t indeed,” said Maurice, impetuously. “I hope I didn’t do wrong in speaking to her when I found her here this morning. If you had come first I should have told you.”</p>
				<p>“I could only have referred you to her, my dear boy. Come⁠—here they are; and now we will have prayers.” As he spoke, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd entered the room, followed closely by Mabel, and then at a little distance by Isabel. The three maidservants were standing behind in a line, ready to come in for prayers. Maurice could not but feel that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd’s manner to him was especially affectionate; for, in truth, hitherto she had kept somewhat aloof from him, as though he had been a ravening wolf. Now she held him by the hand, and had a spark of motherly affection in her eyes, as she, too, repeated her Christmas greeting. It might well be so, thought Maurice. Of course she would be more kind to him than ordinary, if she knew that he was a poor blighted individual. It was a thing of course that Isabel should have told her mother; equally a thing of course that he should be pitied and treated tenderly. But on the next day he would be off. Such tenderness as that would kill him.</p>
				<p>As they sat at breakfast, they all tried to be very gracious to each other. Mabel was sharp enough to know that something special had happened, but could not quite be sure what it was. Isabel struggled very hard to make little speeches about the day, but cannot be said to have succeeded well. Her mother, who had known at once how it was with her child, and had required no positive answers to direct questions to enable her to assume that Isabel was now devoted to her lover, had told her girl that if the man’s love were worth having, he would surely ask her again. “I don’t think he will, mamma,” Isabel had whispered, with her face half-hidden on her mother’s arm. “He must be very unlike other men if he does not,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had said, resolving that the opportunity should not be wanting. Now she was very gracious to Maurice, speaking before him as though he were quite one of the family. Her trembling maternal heart had feared him, while she thought that he might be a ravening wolf, who would steal away her daughter’s heart, leaving nothing in return; but now that he had proved himself willing to enter the fold as a useful domestic sheep, nothing could be too good for him. The parson himself, seeing all this, understanding every turn in his wife’s mind, and painfully anxious that no word might be spoken which should seem to entrap his guest, strove diligently to talk as though nothing was amiss. He spoke of his sermon, and of David Drum, and of the allowance of pudding that was to be given to the inmates of the neighbouring poorhouse. There had been a subscription, so as to relieve the rates from the burden of the plum-pudding, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lownd thought that the farmers had not been sufficiently liberal. “There’s Furness, at Loversloup, gave us half-a-crown. I told him he ought to be ashamed of himself. He declared to me to my face that if he could find puddings for his own bairns, that was enough for him.”</p>
				<p>“The richest farmer in these parts, Maurice,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd. “He holds above three hundred acres of land, and could stock double as many, if he had them,” said the would-be indignant rector, who was thinking a great deal more of his daughter than of the poorhouse festival. Maurice answered him with a word or two, but found it very hard to assume any interest in the question of the pudding. Isabel was more hardhearted, he thought, than even Farmer Furness, of Loversloup. And why should he trouble himself about these people⁠—he, who intended to sell his acres, and go away to Africa? But he smiled and made some reply, and buttered his toast, and struggled hard to seem as though nothing ailed him.</p>
				<p>The parson went down to church before his wife, and Mabel went with him. “Is anything wrong with Maurice Archer?” she asked her father.</p>
				<p>“Nothing, I hope,” said he.</p>
				<p>“Because he doesn’t seem to be able to talk this morning.”</p>
				<p>“Everybody isn’t a chatterbox like you, Mab.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t think I chatter more than mamma, or Bell. Do you know, papa, I think Bell has quarrelled with Maurice Archer.”</p>
				<p>“I hope not. I should be very sorry that there should be any quarrelling at all⁠—particularly on this day. Well, I think you’ve done it very nicely; and it is none the worse because you’ve left the sounding-board alone.” Then Mabel went over to David Drum’s cottage, and asked after the condition of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Drum’s plum-pudding.</p>
				<p>No one had ventured to ask Maurice Archer whether he would stay in church for the sacrament, but he did. Let us hope that no undue motive of pleasing Isabel Lownd had any effect upon him at such a time. But it did please her. Let us hope also that, as she knelt beside her lover at the low railing, her young heart was not too full of her love. That she had been thinking of him throughout her father’s sermon⁠—thinking of him, then resolving that she would think of him no more, and then thinking of him more than ever⁠—must be admitted. When her mother had told her that he would come again to her, she had not attempted to assert that, were he to do so, she would again reject him. Her mother knew all her secret, and, should he not come again, her mother would know that she was heartbroken. She had told him positively that she would never love him. She had so told him, knowing well that at the very moment he was dearer to her than all the world beside. Why had she been so wicked as to lie to him? And if now she were punished for her lie by his silence, would she not be served properly? Her mind ran much more on the subject of this great sin which she had committed on that very morning⁠—that sin against one who loved her so well, and who desired to do good to her⁠—than on those general arguments in favour of Christian kindness and forbearance which the preacher drew from the texts applicable to Christmas Day. All her father’s eloquence was nothing to her. On ordinary occasions he had no more devoted listener; but, on this morning, she could only exercise her spirit by repenting her own unchristian conduct. And then he came and knelt beside her at that sacred moment! It was impossible that he should forgive her, because he could not know that she had sinned against him.</p>
				<p>There were certain visits to her poorer friends in the immediate village which, according to custom, she would make after church. When Maurice and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd went up to the parsonage, she and Mabel made their usual round. They all welcomed her, but they felt that she was not quite herself with them, and even Mabel asked her what ailed her.</p>
				<p>“Why should anything ail me?⁠—only I don’t like walking in the snow.”</p>
				<p>Then Mabel took courage. “If there is a secret, Bell, pray tell me. I would tell you any secret.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know what you mean,” said Isabel, almost crossly.</p>
				<p>“Is there a secret, Bell? I’m sure there is a secret about Maurice.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t⁠—don’t,” said Isabel.</p>
				<p>“I do like Maurice so much. Don’t you like him?”</p>
				<p>“Pray do not talk about him, Mabel.”</p>
				<p>“I believe he is in love with you, Bell; and, if he is, I think you ought to be in love with him. I don’t know how you could have anybody nicer. And he is going to live at Hundlewick, which would be such great fun. Would not papa like it?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know. Oh, dear!⁠—oh, dear!” Then she burst out into tears, and, walking out of the village, told Mabel the whole truth. Mabel heard it with consternation, and expressed her opinion that, in these circumstances, Maurice would never ask again to make her his wife.</p>
				<p>“Then I shall die,” said Isabel, frankly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="christmas-day-at-kirkby-cottage-chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Showing How Isabel Lownd Repented Her Fault</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>In spite of her piteous condition and near prospect of death, Isabel Lownd completed her round of visits among her old friends. That Christmas should be kept in some way by every inhabitant of Kirkby Cliffe, was a thing of course. The district is not poor, and plenty on that day was rarely wanting. But Parson Lownd was not what we call a rich man; and there was no resident squire in the parish. The farmers, comprehending well their own privileges, and aware that the obligation of gentle living did not lie on them, were inclined to be closefisted; and thus there was sometimes a difficulty in providing for the old and the infirm. There was a certain ancient widow in the village, of the name of Mucklewort, who was troubled with three orphan grandchildren and a lame daughter; and Isabel had, some days since, expressed a fear up at the parsonage that the good things of this world might be scarce in the old widow’s cottage. Something had, of course, been done for the old woman, but not enough, as Isabel had thought. “My dear,” her mother had said, “it is no use trying to make very poor people think that they are not poor.”</p>
				<p>“It is only one day in the year,” Isabel had pleaded.</p>
				<p>“What you give in excess to one, you take from another,” replied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd, with the stern wisdom which experience teaches. Poor Isabel could say nothing further, but had feared greatly that the rations in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mucklewort’s abode would be deficient. She now entered the cottage, and found the whole family at that moment preparing themselves for the consumption of a great Christmas banquet. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mucklewort, whose temper was not always the best in the world, was radiant. The children were silent, open-eyed, expectant, and solemn. The lame aunt was in the act of transferring a large lump of beef, which seemed to be commingled in a most inartistic way with potatoes and cabbage, out of a pot on to the family dish. At any rate there was plenty; for no five appetites⁠—had the five all been masculine, adult, and yet youthful⁠—could, by any feats of strength, have emptied that dish at a sitting. And Isabel knew well that there had been pudding. She herself had sent the pudding; but that, as she was well aware, had not been allowed to abide its fate till this late hour of the day. “I’m glad you’re all so well employed,” said Isabel. “I thought you had done dinner long ago. I won’t stop a minute now.”</p>
				<p>The old woman got up from her chair, and nodded her head, and held out her withered old hand to be shaken. The children opened their mouths wider than ever, and hoped there might be no great delay. The lame aunt curtseyed and explained the circumstances. “Beef, Miss Isabel, do take a mortal time t’ boil; and it ain’t no wise good for t’ bairns to have it anyways raw.” To this opinion Isabel gave her full assent, and expressed her gratification that the amount of the beef should be sufficient to require so much cooking. Then the truth came out. “Muster Archer just sent us over from Rowdy’s a meal’s meat with a vengence; God bless him!” “God bless him!” crooned out the old woman, and the children muttered some unintelligible sound, as though aware that duty required them to express some Amen to the prayer of their elders. Now, Rowdy was the butcher living at Grassington, some six miles away⁠—for at Kirkby Cliffe there was no butcher. Isabel smiled all round upon them sweetly, with her eyes full of tears, and then left the cottage without a word.</p>
				<p>He had done this because she had expressed a wish that these people should be kindly treated⁠—had done it without a syllable spoken to her or to anyone⁠—had taken trouble, sending all the way to Grassington for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mucklewort’s beef! No doubt he had given other people beef, and had whispered no word of his kindness to anyone at the rectory. And yet she had taken upon herself to rebuke him, because he had not cared for Christmas Day! As she walked along, silent, holding Mabel’s hand, it seemed to her that of all men he was the most perfect. She had rebuked him, and had then told him⁠—with incredible falseness⁠—that she did not like him; and after that, when he had proposed to her in the kindest, noblest manner, she had rejected him⁠—almost as though he had not been good enough for her! She felt now as though she would like to bite the tongue out of her head for such misbehaviour.</p>
				<p>“Was not that nice of him?” said Mabel. But Isabel could not answer the question. “I always thought he was like that,” continued the younger sister. “If he were my lover, I’d do anything he asked me, because he is so good-natured.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t talk to me,” said Isabel. And Mabel, who comprehended something of the condition of her sister’s mind, did not say another word on their way back to the parsonage.</p>
				<p>It was the rule of the house that on Christmas Day they should dine at four o’clock;⁠—a rule which almost justified the very strong expression with which Maurice first offended the young lady whom he loved. To dine at one or two o’clock is a practice which has its recommendations. It suits the appetite, is healthy, and divides the day into two equal halves, so that no man so dining fancies that his dinner should bring to him an end of his usual occupations. And to dine at six, seven, or eight is well adapted to serve several purposes of life. It is convenient, as inducing that gentle lethargy which will sometimes follow the pleasant act of eating at a time when the work of the day is done; and it is both fashionable and comfortable. But to dine at four is almost worse thau not to dine at all. The rule, however, existed at Kirkby Cliffe parsonage in regard to this one special day in the year, and was always obeyed.</p>
				<p>On this occasion Isabel did not see her lover from the moment in which he left her at the church door till they met at table. She had been with her mother, but her mother had said not a word to her about Maurice. Isabel knew very well that they two had walked home together from the church, and she had thought that her best chance lay in the possibility that he would have spoken of what had occurred during the walk. Had this been so, surely her mother would have told her; but not a word bad been said; and even with her mother Isabel had been too shamefaced to ask a question. In truth, Isabel’s name had not been mentioned between them nor had any allusion been made to what had taken place during the morning. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd had been too wise and too wary⁠—too well aware of what was really due to her daughter⁠—to bring up the subject herself; and he had been silent, subdued, and almost sullen. If he could not get an acknowledgment of affection from the girl herself, he certainly would not endeavour to extract a cold compliance by the mother’s aid. Africa, and a disruption of all the plans of his life, would be better to him than that. But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd knew very well how it was with him; knew how it was with them both; and was aware that in such a condition things should be allowed to arrange themselves. At dinner, both she and the rector were full of mirth and good humour, and Mabel, with great glee, told the story of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mucklewort’s dinner. “I don’t want to destroy your pleasure,” she said, bobbing her head at Maurice; “but it did look so nasty! Beef should always be roast beef on Christmas Day.”</p>
				<p>“I told the butcher it was to be roast beef,” said Maurice, sadly.</p>
				<p>“I dare say the little Muckleworts would just as soon have it boiled,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd. “Beef is beef to them, and a pot for boiling is an easy apparatus.”</p>
				<p>“If you had beef, Miss Mab, only once or twice a year,” said her father, “you would not care whether it were roast or boiled.” But Isabel spoke not a word. She was most anxious to join the conversation about <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mucklewort, and would have liked much to give testimony to the generosity displayed in regard to quantity; but she found that she could not do it. She was absolutely dumb. Maurice Archer did speak, making, every now and then, a terrible effort to be jocose; but Isabel from first to last was silent. Only by silence could she refrain from a renewed deluge of tears.</p>
				<p>In the evening two or three girls came in with their younger brothers, the children of farmers of the better class in the neighbourhood, and the usual attempts were made at jollity. Games were set on foot, in which even the rector joined, instead of going to sleep behind his book, and Mabel, still conscious of her sister’s wounds, did her very best to promote the sports. There was blindman’s-buff, and hide and seek, and snapdragon, and forfeits, and a certain game with music and chairs⁠—very prejudicial to the chairs⁠—in which it was everybody’s object to sit down as quickly as possible when the music stopped. In the game Isabel insisted on playing, because she could do that alone. But even to do this was too much for her. The sudden pause could hardly be made without a certain hilarity of spirit, and her spirits were unequal to any exertion. Maurice went through his work like a man, was blinded, did his forfeits, and jostled for the chairs with the greatest diligence; but in the midst of it all he, too, was as solemn as a judge, and never once spoke a single word to Isabel. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd, who usually was not herself much given to the playing of games, did on this occasion make an effort, and absolutely consented to cry the forfeits; but Mabel was wonderfully quiet, so that the farmer’s daughters hardly perceived that there was anything amiss.</p>
				<p>It came to pass, after a while, that Isabel had retreated to her room⁠—not for the night, as it was as yet hardly eight o’clock⁠—and she certainly would not disappear till the visitors had taken their departure⁠—a ceremony which was sure to take place with the greatest punctuality at ten, after an early supper. But she had escaped for awhile, and in the meantime some frolic was going on which demanded the absence of one of the party from the room, in order that mysteries might be arranged of which the absent one should remain in ignorance. Maurice was thus banished, and desired to remain in desolation for the space of five minutes; but, just as he had taken up his position, Isabel descended with slow, solemn steps, and found him standing at her father’s study door. She was passing on, and had almost entered the drawing-room, when he called her. “Miss Lownd,” he said. Isabel stopped, but did not speak; she was absolutely beyond speaking. The excitement of the day had been so great, that she was all but overcome by it, and doubted, herself, whether she would be able to keep up appearances till the supper should be over, and she should be relieved for the night. “Would you let me say one word to you?” said Maurice. She bowed her head and went with him into the study.</p>
				<p>Five minutes had been allowed for the arrangement of the mysteries, and at the end of the five minutes Maurice was authorized, by the rules of the game, to return to the room. But he did not come, and upon Mabel’s suggesting that possibly he might not be able to see his watch in the dark, she was sent to fetch him. She burst into the study, and there she found the truant and her sister, very close, standing together on the hearthrug. “I didn’t know you were here, Bell,” she exclaimed. Whereupon Maurice, as she declared afterwards, jumped round the table after her, and took her in his arms and kissed her. “But you must come,” said Mabel, who accepted the embrace with perfect goodwill.</p>
				<p>“Of course you must. Do go, pray, and I’ll follow⁠—almost immediately.” Mabel perceived at once that her sister had altogether recovered her voice.</p>
				<p>“I’ll tell ’em you’re coming,” said Mabel, vanishing.</p>
				<p>“You must go now,” said Isabel. “They’ll all be away soon, and then you can talk about it.” As she spoke, he was standing with his arm round her waist, and Isabel Lownd was the happiest girl in all Craven.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lownd knew all about it from the moment in which Maurice Archer’s prolonged absence had become cause of complaint among the players. Her mind had been intent upon the matter, and she had become well aware that it was only necessary that the two young people should be alone together for a few moments. Mabel had entertained great hopes, thinking, however, that perhaps three or four years must be passed in melancholy gloomy doubts before the path of true love could be made to run smooth; but the light had shone upon her as soon as she saw them standing together. The parson knew nothing about it till the supper was over. Then, when the front door was open, and the farmers’ daughters had been cautioned not to get themselves more wet than they could help in the falling snow, Maurice said a word to his future father-in-law. “She has consented at last, sir. I hope you have nothing to say against it.”</p>
				<p>“Not a word,” said the parson, grasping the young man’s hand, and remembering, as he did so, the extension of the time over which that phrase “at last” was supposed to spread itself.</p>
				<p>Maurice had been promised some further opportunity of “talking about it,” and of course claimed a fulfilment of the promise. There was a difficulty about it, as Isabel, having now been assured of her happiness, was anxious to talk about it all to her mother rather than to him; but he was imperative, and there came at last for him a quarter of an hour of delicious triumph in that very spot on which he had been so scolded for saying that Christmas was a bore. “You were so very sudden,” said Isabel, excusing herself for her conduct in the morning.</p>
				<p>“But you did love me?”</p>
				<p>“If I do now, that ought to be enough for you. But I did, and I’ve been so unhappy since; and I thought that, perhaps, you would never speak to me again. But it was all your fault; you were so sudden. And then you ought to have asked papa first⁠—you know you ought. But, Maurice, you will promise me one thing. You won’t ever again say that Christmas Day is a bore!”</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
