<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Never, Never—Never, Never</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="never-never" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Never, Never⁠—Never, Never</h2>
			<section id="never-never-1" epub:type="part">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Volume</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<h4>CHAPTER ONE: Mary Tomkins</h4>
				<p>John Thomas was a clerk in the post-office, beloved by all who knew him; but he never did any work, usually had a novel and a bottle of brandy in his desk, and broke the heart of the Junior Assistant Secretary in whose Department he had been placed. He lived at 1 Finsbury Square, where he paid thirty shillings a week for his board and lodging, washing included, and fell in love with Mary Tomkins, the niece of Mrs. Johnson, the lodging-house keeper.</p>
				<p>If ever there was an angel upon earth, it was Mary Tomkins. She had long eyes and a short nose, a little mouth and a big chin, silken hair and a satin complexion, a high forehead and a small waist; but her manner was more than her appearance, and she was everything her aunt could wish her.</p>
				<p>“Never, Johnny,” she said to her love, as he sat with his arm round her waist, “never, never, never, never.”</p>
				<p>“Why the deuce won’t you, then?” said John Thomas.</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER TWO: The First Kiss</h4>
				<p>Why wouldn’t she? It was now two years since she had consented to be kissed, or, as may perhaps have been the case, had been kissed without her consent by the Rev. Abraham Dribble. Mr. Dribble had been a Low-Church scoundrel. He had kissed and had left the parish, having sneaked himself into the good graces of a bishop. Mary soon knew the nature of the man, but the kiss was still there and hallowed. “Never, never, never, never!” It was her daily language as Johnny Thomas sat with his arm around her waist when his office hours were over.</p>
				<p>“Surely you love him,” said her aunt, in confidence, while they were preparing together a Saturday pie for the lodgers. “Shall there be two loves?” asked Mary. “Certainly,” said Mrs. Johnson, practically, “if the first fails, or maybe three⁠—as circumstances may require.” “Never, never, never, never!” said Mary Tomkins.</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER THREE: Anastasia Fitzapplejohn</h4>
				<p>On Monday, April 1, Mary Tomkins received the following letter:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Only that he pleads a previous promise to you, John Thomas would be my bridegroom. I have his heart, I know. And, oh! and oh! and oh! it is too true that he has mine. Be noble and make him free, and enjoy the undying friendship of Anastasia Fitzapplejohn.</p>
					<p>P.S. Or keep him in your mercenary bonds, and then you shall know what a raging woman can do.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Mary sat as usual with her waist encircled by his arm, while with her left hand she held the crumpled letter.</p>
				<p>“John,” she said, “who has your heart?”</p>
				<p>“Who but you, my poppet?”</p>
				<p>“Anastasia Fitzapplejohn has your heart.”</p>
				<p>“She be⁠—oh! anything you please except married to me.”</p>
				<p>“Where were you last night, John? Did you pass the hours you were away from here with that female?”</p>
				<p>“But listen to me, Mary.”</p>
				<p>“I demand to know whether you were there!”</p>
				<p>“Wait till I tell you all about it.”</p>
				<p>“I will hear nothing of such a one as Miss Fitzapplejohn.”</p>
				<p>“For my sake, Mary.”</p>
				<p>“Never, never, never, never!” she said, as her head dropped on his shoulder.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="never-never-2" epub:type="part">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Volume</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<h4>CHAPTER ONE: That Sobered Him</h4>
				<p>When Mr. Dribble married the Right Honorable Catharine Mount Energy, the widow of the Earl of Pieponder, Mary Tomkins shut herself up for three weeks in her aunt’s store-closet. She was visited of course, from time to time, by different members of the establishment, and would declare that she was perfectly happy; but on such occasions her last words always bore the same burden, “Never, never, never, never!” One day while she was there, John Thomas came home, a little, perhaps, the worse for what he had taken, and made his way in among the pickle jars and jam-pots. “Mary,” he said, ’the parshon’s married⁠—might ashwell come round, old girl, ansh marry me.”</p>
				<p>“John,” she said, very gravely, “Anastasia Fitzapplejohn, no doubt, is fond of these jovial humors. Had you not better seek her society?” He answered with an oath, and expressed the wish that Miss Fitzapplejohn might be taken at once to a place he should not have named. “Tomorrow you will wish the same for me,” she said. That sobered him. He fell prostrate at her feet, arid, grovelling in the dust, swore with many oaths that if she would only consent to be Mrs. Thomas, he would take the pledge on the next morning. She bent down over him and gave him her cool, soft hand to raise him, and with her taper fingers pushed the dishevilled hair from off his forehead, and then she brushed his clothes. But as she did so she said continually, “Never, never, never, never!”</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER TWO: Love Forgives</h4>
				<p>When the Right Honorable Catharine Mount Energy, Countess of Pieponder, died, which she did the week after she had married Mr. Dribble, it was discovered that her affairs were very much out of order. By the singular but well-known laws of Kent, in which county the marriage had been celebrated, Mr. Dribble became responsible for the debts of his widow and all her relations. This was a crushing blow, and just at this time the bishop dismissed him as being lacking in spiritual grace. Mr. Dribble then bethought himself of the sweet passages of his earlier years, and, remembering that Mrs. Johnson had saved a little money, saw at once where lay his only chance of salvation here on earth. So he went to Finsbury Square, nothing abashed.</p>
				<p>“Do you love me, Mary?” he said.</p>
				<p>“The tell-tale blood rushed to her face, as she stood for half an hour gently shaking her head and gazing into his eyes. Then she said, with that sweet voice of hers, which was the life of all her lovers, “Love you, Mr. Dribble? Ay, that I do.”</p>
				<p>“And love forgives,” he said, taking her sweet hand within his clammy grasp.</p>
				<p>“Yes, love forgives.”</p>
				<p>“And you forgive.”</p>
				<p>“I have forgiven.”</p>
				<p>“Then you will consent to become Mrs. Dribble?”</p>
				<p>“Again she stood gazing into his eyes for half an hour; but when she made her answer, it was still the same, “Never, never, never, never!”</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER THREE: Squire Robinson</h4>
				<p>“About This Time there came to town an old gentleman from the country, who had known Mary’s father, and he brought with him his daughter Jemima. Jemima Robinson and Mary Tomkins were fast friends, though narrow circumstances compelled the latter to administer to the wants of her aunt’s inmates. Now, it was thought that the presence of the old squire and his daughter might induce the heart-laden girl to take counsel with prudence, and to give herself either to the one suitor or to the other.</p>
				<p>“Mary dear,” said the squire, “you must think of the future.”</p>
				<p>“And of the past,” said Mary.</p>
				<p>“Let the past take care of itself, my dear. A house over your head and half a dozen children are great blessings. Johnny Thomas is a sprightly fellow. Thou hast half a mind to take him, I know, Mary.”</p>
				<p>“But not more than half, Mr. Robinson.”</p>
				<p>“Dang it, girl! Then have the parson. He had ever a sheep’s eye for thee, and, if I remember rightly, thou wast sweet upon him once.”</p>
				<p>“ ’Twas but half sweet,” she whispered, with her eyes turned to the ground.</p>
				<p>“But thou knowest how the donkey fared who was starved to death between two bundles of hay. Thou wouldst not imitate the ass!”</p>
				<p>“The poor brute at any rate was honest,” said Mary.</p>
				<p>“Thou robbest me almost of my patience,” said the squire, angrily. “Thou canst not have both. Take one and leave the other.”</p>
				<p>But she answered him only as she had ever answered, “Never, never, never, never!”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="never-never-3" epub:type="part">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Volume</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<h4>CHAPTER ONE: The New Bishop</h4>
				<p>Jemima Robinson was a sprightly girl, and if any one had dominion over Mary Tomkins it was she. “Marry come up, Molly!” she said, “how many men do you think are going to die for you? If I were Johnny Thomas I would take you by the neck and lug you into church!”</p>
				<p>“It would avail nothing, Jemima,” said Mary Tomkins.</p>
				<p>“I’d stop that ‘Never, never,’ with a mouthful of kisses.”</p>
				<p>“That has vailed nothing, Jemima,” she said.</p>
				<p>“What ar’t feared on, girl?” she said. “Is not marriage honorable ?”</p>
				<p>“And so is single-blessedness.”</p>
				<p>“Single fiddlestick! I would it were my chance.”</p>
				<p>“And have you no lovers, Jemima?” “Not a ghost of a swain! not a thread-paper of a man. Would that I had! Thank God, I could love any man that would ask me. But to lead apes in hell with two such strings to your bow! ’Tis a sheer wasting of the gifts of Providence.”</p>
				<p>“I do love to lead apes,” said Mary.</p>
				<p>“Then lead one here and take the parson. You have not heard it, perhaps, but I know. The Queen will make him Bishop of Rochester next week. She saw his profile the other day in a shop-window, and swore that he was a sweet divine.”</p>
				<p>“And will Abraham really be a bishop?”</p>
				<p>“ ’Tis true.”</p>
				<p>“Cherubic with lawn sleeves, and seraphic with an apron!” Mary turned her eyes up to heaven as she spoke.</p>
				<p>“Indeed he will. And you⁠—you would look the bishop’s wife to a T.”</p>
				<p>Mary paused that day; she paused all that night; she paused the next morning, and then she made her reply, “Never, never, never, never!”</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER TWO: The New Postmaster-General</h4>
				<p>On the next morning, John Thomas was gazetted postmaster-general. He had invented a new farthing postage-stamp, and it was felt that his claims could not be passed over. He expelled the novel and the bottle of brandy from his desk, and found that the exigencies of his new position required him to leave Finsbury Square. But though he was now Lord Thomas, he did not forget Mary Tomkins; for whether he were “my lord” or simply “Johnny Thomas,” he carried a loyal heart in his bosom; and though he may have dallied with Anastasia Fitzapplejohn, such dallying had been but the efflorescence of his youth. So now he spoke out to the lady of his heart with a gravity becoming his lofty rank.</p>
				<p>“Miss Tomkins,” he said.</p>
				<p>“My lord,” she replied, standing before him with downcast eyes.</p>
				<p>“Miss Tomkins, there have been some sweet words between you and me.”</p>
				<p>“Aye, my lord; and more than words.”</p>
				<p>“Some passages of what the world calls love.”</p>
				<p>“Trifles, my lord; meaning nothing to one so high in the world’s esteem as your lordship.” Then were her eyes more downcast than ever, and her little fingers moved tremulously one over another.</p>
				<p>“Miss Tomkins,” he said, “lend me that hand.” And she lent him her little hand. He, too, stood awhile, gazing, and then he spoke again. “Miss Tomkins,” he said, “shall it be mine forever?”</p>
				<p>But she answered him straightway, with more then her usual eagerness, “Never, never, never, never!”</p>
				<h4>CHAPTER THREE: “Till Another young Man Came”</h4>
				<p>The Bishop of Rochester sat in his palace, and over against him sat Mrs. Dribble, his second wife. No more powerful lady ever assisted to carry a crozier.</p>
				<p>Lord Thomas quaffed his ruby wines in a West-End mansion, and Lady Thomas, the daughter of a marquis, counted the corks.</p>
				<p>But Mary Tomkins still made the gravies and eked out the butter in Finsbury Square. Did no soft regrets mar the quiescence of her life? Perhaps a few soft regrets did mar the quiecence of her life.</p>
				<p>But her aunt observed that, during all her leisure hours, she applied herself with unaccustomed diligence to her needle. At last she brought forth from her closet a coarse and somewhat thick chamber-gown or morning wrapper. Its color was gray, and ’twas made of serge; but up and down the collar and round the waist, and in and out of the plaits a curious device had been worked. The letters were not easy to decipher, but when they were read they ran as follows: - “OLD MAID”</p>
				<p>“And will you wear it?” asked her astonished aunt.</p>
				<p>“Indeed I will,” said Mary. “Forever and ever, for ever and ever.”</p>
				<p>And she wore it⁠—till another young man came that way.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
