<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Lady of Launay</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-lady-of-launay" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lady of Launay</h2>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Became a Young Lady of Importance</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>How great is the difference between doing our duty and desiring to do it; between doing our duty and a conscientious struggle to do it; between duty really done and that satisfactory state of mind which comes from a conviction that it has been performed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was a lady who through her whole life had thought of little else than duty. Though she was possessed of wealth and social position, though she had been a beautiful woman, though all phases of self-indulgent life had been open to her, she had always adhered to her own idea of duty. Many delights had tempted her. She would fain have travelled, so as to see the loveliness of the world; but she had always remained at home. She could have enjoyed the society of intelligent sojourners in capitals; but she had confined herself to that of her country neighbours. In early youth she had felt herself to be influenced by a taste for dress; she had consequently compelled herself to use raiment of extreme simplicity. She would buy no pictures, no gems, no china, because when young she found that she liked such things too well. She would not leave the parish church to hear a good sermon elsewhere, because even a sermon might be a snare. In the early days of her widowed life it became, she thought, her duty to adopt one of two little motherless, fatherless girls, who had been left altogether unprovided for in the world; and having the choice between the two, she took the plain one, who had weak eyes and a downcast, unhappy look, because it was her duty to deny herself. It was not her fault that the child, who was so unattractive at six, had become beautiful at sixteen, with sweet soft eyes, still downcast occasionally, as though ashamed of their own loveliness; nor was it her fault that Bessy Pryor had so ministered to her in her advancing years as almost to force upon her the delights of self-indulgence. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had struggled manfully against these wiles, and, in the performance of her duty, had fought with them, even to an attempt to make herself generally disagreeable to the young child. The child, however, had conquered, having wound herself into the old woman’s heart of hearts. When Bessy at fifteen was like to die, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles for awhile broke down altogether. She lingered by the bedside, caressed the thin hands, stroked the soft locks, and prayed to the Lord to stay his hand, and to alter his purpose. But when Bessy was strong again she strove to return to her wonted duties. But Bessy, through it all, was quite aware that she was loved.</p>
				<p>Looking back at her own past life, and looking also at her days as they were passing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles thought that she did her duty as well as it is given to frail man or frail woman to perform it. There had been lapses, but still she was conscious of great strength. She did believe of herself that should a great temptation come in her way she would stand strong against it. A great temptation did come in her way, and it is the purport of this little story to tell how far she stood and how far she fell.</p>
				<p>Something must be communicated to the reader of her condition in life, and of Bessy’s; something, but not much. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had been a Miss Launay, and, by the death of four brothers almost in their infancy, had become heiress to a large property in Somersetshire. At twenty-five she was married to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Miles, who had a property of his own in the next county, and who at the time of their marriage represented that county in Parliament. When she had been married a dozen years she was left a widow, with two sons, the younger of whom was then about three years old. Her own property, which was much the larger of the two, was absolutely her own; but was intended for Philip, who was her younger boy. Frank Miles, who was eight years older, inherited the other. Circumstances took him much away from his mother’s wings. There were troubles among trustees and executors; and the father’s heir, after he came of age, saw but little of his mother. She did her duty, but what she suffered in doing it may be imagined.</p>
				<p>Philip was brought up by his mother, who, perhaps, had some consolation in remembering that the younger boy, who was always good to her, would become a man of higher standing in the world than his brother. He was called Philip Launay, the family name having passed on through the mother to the intended heir of the Launay property. He was thirteen when Bessy Pryor was brought home to Launay Park, and, as a schoolboy, had been good to the poor little creature, who for the first year or two had hardly dared to think her life her own amidst the strange huge spaces of the great house. He had despised her, of course; but had not been boyishly cruel to her, and had given her his old playthings. Everybody at Launay had at first despised Bessy Pryor; though the mistress of the house had been thoroughly good to her. There was no real link between her and Launay. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pryor had, as a humble friend, been under great obligations to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Launay, and these obligations, as is their wont, had produced deep love in the heart of the person conferring them. Then both <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Pryor had died, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had declared that she would take one of the children. She fully intended to bring the girl up sternly and well, with hard belongings, such as might suit her condition. But there had been lapses, occasioned by those unfortunate female prettinesses, and by that equally unfortunate sickness. Bessy never rebelled, and gave, therefore, no scope to an exhibition of extreme duty; and she had a way of kissing her adopted mamma which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles knew to be dangerous. She struggled not to be kissed, but ineffectually. She preached to herself, in the solitude of her own room, sharp sermons against the sweet softness of the girl’s caresses; but she could not put a stop to them. “Yes; I will,” the girl would say, so softly, but so persistently! Then there would be a great embrace, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles felt to be as dangerous as a diamond, as bad as a box at the opera.</p>
				<p>Bessy had been despised at first all around Launay. Unattractive children are despised, especially when, as in this case, they are nobodies. Bessy Pryor was quite nobody. And certainly there had never been a child more powerless to assert herself. She was for a year or two inferior to the parson’s children, and was not thought much of by the farmers’ wives. The servants called her Miss Bessy, of course; but it was not till after that illness that there existed among them any of that reverence which is generally felt in the servants’ hall for the young ladies of the house. It was then, too, that the parson’s daughters found that Bessy was nice to walk with, and that the tenants began to make much of her when she called. The old lady’s secret manifestations in the sick bedroom had, perhaps, been seen. The respect paid to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles in that and the next parish was of the most reverential kind. Had she chosen that a dog should be treated as one of the Launays, the dog would have received all the family honours. It must be acknowledged of her that in the performance of her duty she had become a rural tyrant. She gave away many petticoats; but they all had to be stitched according to her idea of stitching a petticoat. She administered physic gratis to the entire estate; but the estate had to take the doses as she chose to have them mixed. It was because she had fallen something short of her acknowledged duty in regard to Bessy Pryor that the parson’s daughters were soon even proud of an intimacy with the girl, and that the old butler, when she once went away for a week in the winter, was so careful to wrap her feet up warm in the carriage.</p>
				<p>In this way, during the two years subsequent to Bessy’s illness, there had gradually come up an altered condition of life at Launay. It could not have been said before that Bessy, though she had been Miss Bessy, was as a daughter in the house. But now a daughter’s privileges were accorded to her. When the old squiress was driven out about the county, Bessy was expected, but was asked rather than ordered to accompany her. She always went; but went because she decided on going, not because she was told. And she had a horse to ride; and she was allowed to arrange flowers for the drawing-room; and the gardener did what she told him. What daughter could have more extensive privileges? But poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had her misgivings, often asking herself what would come of it all.</p>
				<p>When Bessy had been recovering from her illness, Philip, who was seven years her senior, was making a grand tour about the world. He had determined to see, not Paris, Vienna, and Rome, which used to make a grand tour, but Japan, Patagonia, and the South Sea Islands. He had gone in such a way as to ensure the consent of his mother. Two other well-minded young men of fortune had accompanied him, and they had been intent on botany, the social condition of natives, and the progress of the world generally. There had been no harum-scarum rushing about without an object. Philip had been away for more than two years, and had seen all there was to be seen in Japan, Patagonia, and the South Sea Islands. Between them, the young men had written a book, and the critics had been unanimous in observing how improved in those days were the aspirations of young men. On his return he came to Launay for a week or two, and then went up to London. When, after four months, he returned to his mother’s house, he was twenty-seven years of age; and Bessy was just twenty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles knew that there was cause for fear; but she had already taken steps to prevent the danger which she had foreseen.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Wouldn’t Marry the Parson</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Of course there would be danger. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had been aware of that from the commencement of things. There had been to her a sort of pleasure in feeling that she had undertaken a duty which might possibly lead to circumstances which would be altogether heartbreaking. The duty of mothering Bessy was so much more a duty because, even when the little girl was blear-eyed and thin, there was present to her mind all the horror of a love affair between her son and the little girl. The Mileses had always been much, and the Launays very much in the west of England. Bessy had not a single belonging that was anything. Then she had become beautiful and attractive, and worse than that, so much of a person about the house that Philip himself might be tempted to think that she was fit to be his wife!</p>
				<p>Among the duties prescribed to herself by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was none stronger than that of maintaining the family position of the Launays. She was one of those who not only think that blue blood should remain blue, but that blood not blue should be allowed no azure mixture. The proper severance of classes was a religion to her. Bessy was a gentlewoman, so much had been admitted, and therefore she had been brought into the drawing-room instead of being relegated among the servants, and had thus grown up to be, oh, so dangerous! She was a gentlewoman, and fit to be a gentleman’s wife, but not fit to be the wife of the heir of the Launays. The reader will understand, perhaps, that I, the writer of this little history, think her to have been fit to become the wife of any man who might have been happy enough to win her young heart, however blue his blood. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had felt that precautions and remedies and arrangements were necessary.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had altogether approved of the journey to Japan. That had been a preventive, and might probably afford time for an arrangement. She had even used her influence to prolong the travelling till the arrangements should be complete; but in this she had failed. She had written to her son, saying that, as his sojourn in strange lands would so certainly tend to the amelioration of the human races generally⁠—for she had heard of the philanthropic inquiries, of the book, and the botany⁠—she would by no means press upon him her own natural longings. If another year was required, the necessary remittances should be made with a liberal hand. But Philip, who had chosen to go because he liked it, came back when he liked it, and there he was at Launay before a certain portion of the arrangements had been completed, as to which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had been urgent during the last six months of his absence.</p>
				<p>A good-looking young clergyman in the neighbourhood, with a living of £400 a year, and a fortune of £6,000 of his own, had during the time been proposed to Bessy by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Alexander Morrison, was an excellent young man; but it may be doubted whether the patronage by which he was put into the living of Budcombe at an early age, over the head of many senior curates, had been exercised with sound clerical motives. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was herself the patroness, and, having for the last six years felt the necessity of providing a husband for Bessy, had looked about for a young man who should have good gifts and might probably make her happy. A couple of thousand pounds added had at first suggested itself to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. Then love had ensnared her, and Bessy had become dear to everyone, and money was plenty. The thing should be made so beautiful to all concerned that there should be no doubt of its acceptance. The young parson didn’t doubt. Why should he? The living had been a wonderful stroke of luck for him! The portion proposed would put him at once among the easy-living gentlemen of the county; and then the girl herself! Bessy had loomed upon him as feminine perfection from the first moment he had seen her. It was to him as though the heavens were raining their choicest blessings on his head.</p>
				<p>Nor had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles any reason to find fault with Bessy. Had Bessy jumped into the man’s arms directly he had been offered to her as a lover, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles would herself have been shocked. She knew enough of Bessy to be sure that there would be no such jumping. Bessy had at first been startled, and, throwing herself into her old friend’s arms, had pleaded her youth. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had accepted the embrace, had acknowledged the plea, and had expressed herself quite satisfied, simply saying that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison would be allowed to come about the house, and use his own efforts to make himself agreeable. The young parson had come about the house, and had shown himself to be good-humoured and pleasant. Bessy never said a word against him; did in truth try to persuade herself that it would be nice to have him as a lover; but she failed. “I think he is very good,” she said one day, when she was pressed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles.</p>
				<p>“And he is a gentleman.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes,” said Bessy.</p>
				<p>“And good-looking.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know that that matters.”</p>
				<p>“No, my dear, no; only he is handsome. And then he is very fond of you.” But Bessy would not commit herself, and certainly had never given any encouragement to the gentleman himself.</p>
				<p>This had taken place just before Philip’s return. At that time his stay at Launay was to be short; and during his sojourn his hands were to be very full. There would not be much danger during that fortnight, as Bessy was not prone to put herself forward in any man’s way. She met him as his little pet of former days, and treated him quite as though he were a superior being. She ran about for him as he arranged his botanical treasures, and took in all that he said about the races. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, as she watched them, still trusted that there might be no danger. But she went on with her safeguards. “I hope you like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison,” she said to her son.</p>
				<p>“Very much indeed, mother; but why do you ask?”</p>
				<p>“It is a secret; but I’ll tell you. I think he will become the husband of our dear Bessy.”</p>
				<p>“Marry Bessy!”</p>
				<p>“Why not?” Then there was a pause. “You know how dearly I love Bessy. I hope you will not think me wrong when I tell you that I propose to give what will be for her a large fortune, considering all things.”</p>
				<p>“You should treat her just as though she were a daughter and a sister,” said Philip.</p>
				<p>“Not quite that! But you will not begrudge her six thousand pounds?”</p>
				<p>“It is not half enough.”</p>
				<p>“Well, well. Six thousand pounds is a large sum of money to give away. However, I am sure we shall not differ about Bessy. Don’t you think <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison would make her a good husband?” Philip looked very serious, knitted his brows, and left the room, saying that he would think about it.</p>
				<p>To make him think that the marriage was all but arranged would be a great protection. There was a protection to his mother also in hearing him speak of Bessy as being almost a sister. But there was still a further protection. Down away in Cornwall there was another Launay heiress coming up, some third or fourth cousin, and it had long since been settled among certain elders that the Launay properties should be combined. To this Philip had given no absolute assent; had even run away to Japan just when it had been intended that he should go to Cornwall. The Launay heiress had then only been seventeen, and it had been felt to be almost as well that there should be delay, so that the time was not passed by the young man in dangerous neighbourhoods. The South Sea Islands and Patagonia had been safe. And now when the idea of combining the properties was again mooted, he at first said nothing against it. Surely such precautions as these would suffice, especially as Bessy’s retiring nature would not allow her to fall in love with any man within the short compass of a fortnight.</p>
				<p>Not a word more was said between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles and her son as to the prospects of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison; not a word more then. She was intelligent enough to perceive that the match was not agreeable to him; but she attributed this feeling on his part to an idea that Bessy ought to be treated in all respects as though she were a daughter of the house of Launay. The idea was absurd, but safe. The match, if it could be managed, would of course go on, but should not be mentioned to him again till it could be named as a thing absolutely arranged. But there was no present danger. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles felt sure that there was no present danger. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had seen Bessy grow out of meagre thinness and early want of ruddy health, into gradual proportions of perfect feminine loveliness; but, having seen the gradual growth, she did not know how lovely the girl was. A woman hardly ever does know how omnipotent may be the attraction which some feminine natures, and some feminine forms, diffuse unconsciously on the young men around them.</p>
				<p>But Philip knew, or rather felt. As he walked about the park he declared to himself that Alexander Morrison was an insufferably impudent clerical prig; for which assertion there was, in truth, no ground whatsoever. Then he accused his mother of a sordid love of money and property, and swore to himself that he would never stir a step towards Cornwall. If they chose to have that red-haired Launay girl up from the far west, he would go away to London, or perhaps back to Japan. But what shocked him most was that such a girl as Bessy, a girl whom he treated always just like his own sister, should give herself to such a man as that young parson at the very first asking! He struck the trees among which he was walking with his stick as he thought of the meanness of feminine nature. And then such a greasy, ugly brute! But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison was not at all greasy, and would have been acknowledged by the world at large to be much better looking than Philip Launay.</p>
				<p>Then came the day of his departure. He was going up to London in March to see his book through the press, make himself intimate at his club, and introduce himself generally to the ways of that life which was to be his hereafter. It had been understood that he was to pass the season in London, and that then the combined-property question should come on in earnest. Such was his mother’s understanding; but by this time, by the day of his departure, he was quite determined that the combined-property question should never receive any consideration at his hands.</p>
				<p>Early on that day he met Bessy somewhere about the house. She was very sweet to him on this occasion, partly because she loved him dearly⁠—as her adopted brother; partly because he was going; partly because it was her nature to be sweet! “There is one question I want to ask you,” he said suddenly, turning round upon her with a frown. He had not meant to frown, but it was his nature to do so when his heart frowned within him.</p>
				<p>“What is it, Philip?” She turned pale as she spoke, but looked him full in the face.</p>
				<p>“Are you engaged to that parson?” She went on looking at him, but did not answer a word. “Are you going to marry him? I have a right to ask.” Then she shook her head. “You certainly are not?” Now as he spoke his voice was changed, and the frown had vanished. Again she shook her head. Then he got hold of her hand, and she left her hand with him, not thinking of him as other than a brother. “I am so glad. I detest that man.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Philip; he is very good!”</p>
				<p>“I do not care twopence for his goodness. You are quite sure?” Now she nodded her head. “It would have been most awful, and would have made me miserable; miserable. Of course, my mother is the best woman in the world; but why can’t she let people alone to find husbands and wives for themselves?” There was a slight frown, and then with a visible effort he completed his speech. “Bessy, you have grown to be the loveliest woman that ever I looked upon.”</p>
				<p>She withdrew her hand very suddenly. “Philip, you should not say such a thing as that.”</p>
				<p>“Why not, if I think it?”</p>
				<p>“People should never say anything to anybody about themselves.”</p>
				<p>“Shouldn’t they?”</p>
				<p>“You know what I mean. It is not nice. It’s the sort of stuff which people who ain’t ladies and gentlemen put into books.”</p>
				<p>“I should have thought I might say anything.”</p>
				<p>“So you may; and of course you are different. But there are things that are so disagreeable!”</p>
				<p>“And I am one of them?”</p>
				<p>“No, Philip, you are the truest and best of brothers.”</p>
				<p>“At any rate you won’t⁠—” Then he paused.</p>
				<p>“No, I won’t.”</p>
				<p>“That’s a promise to your best and dearest brother?” She nodded her head again, and he was satisfied.</p>
				<p>He went away, and when he returned to Launay at the end of four months he found that things were not going on pleasantly at the Park. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison had been refused, with a positive assurance from the young lady that she would never change her mind, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had become more stern than ever in the performance of her duty to her family.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Came to Love the Heir of Launay</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Matters became very unpleasant at the Park soon after Philip went away. There had been something in his manner as he left, and a silence in regard to him on Bessy’s part, which created, not at first surprise, but uneasiness in the mind of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. Bessy hardly mentioned his name, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles knew enough of the world to feel that such restraint must have a cause. It would have been natural for a girl so circumstanced to have been full of Philip and his botany. Feeling this she instigated the parson to renewed attempts; but the parson had to tell her that there was no chance for him. “What has she said?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles.</p>
				<p>“That it can never be.”</p>
				<p>“But it shall be,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, stirred on this occasion to an assertion of the obstinacy which was in her nature. Then there was a most unpleasant scene between the old lady and her dependent. “What is it that you expect?” she asked.</p>
				<p>“Expect, aunt!” Bessy had been instructed to call <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles her aunt.</p>
				<p>“What do you think is to be done for you?”</p>
				<p>“Done for me! You have done everything. May I not stay with you?” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles gave utterance to a very long lecture, in which many things were explained to Bessy. Bessy’s position was said to be one very peculiar in its nature. Were <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles to die there would be no home for her. She could not hope to find a home in Philip’s house as a real sister might have done. Everybody loved her because she had been good and gracious, but it was her duty to marry⁠—especially her duty⁠—so that there might be no future difficulty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison was exactly the man that such, a girl as Bessy ought to want as a husband. Bessy through her tears declared that she didn’t want any husband, and that she certainly did not want <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison.</p>
				<p>“Has Philip said anything?” asked the imprudent old woman. Then Bessy was silent. “What has Philip said to you?”</p>
				<p>“I told him, when he asked, that I should never marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison.” Then it was⁠—in that very moment⁠—that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles in truth suspected the blow that was to fall upon her; and in that same moment she resolved that, let the pain be what it might to any or all of them, she would do her duty by her family.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” she said to herself, as she sat alone in the unadorned, unattractive sanctity of her own bedroom, “I will do my duty at any rate now.” With deep remorse she acknowledged to herself that she had been remiss. For a moment her anger was very bitter. She had warmed a reptile in her bosom. The very words came to her thoughts, though they were not pronounced. But the words were at once rejected. The girl had been no reptile. The girl had been true. The girl had been as sweet a girl as had ever brightened the hearth of an old woman. She acknowledged so much to herself even in this moment of her agony. But not the less would she do her duty by the family of the Launays. Let the girl do what she might, she must be sent away⁠—got rid of⁠—sacrificed in any way rather than that Philip should be allowed to make himself a fool.</p>
				<p>When for a couple of days she had turned it all in her mind she did not believe that there was as yet any understanding between the girl and Philip. But still she was sure that the danger existed. Not only had the girl refused her destined husband⁠—just such a man as such a girl as Bessy ought to have loved⁠—but she had communicated her purpose in that respect to Philip. There had been more of confidence between them than between her and the girl. How could they two have talked on such a subject unless there had been between them something of stricter, closer friendship even than that of brother and sister? There had been something of a conspiracy between them against her⁠—her who at Launay was held to be omnipotent, against her who had in her hands all the income, all the power, all the ownership⁠—the mother of one of them, and the protectress and only friend of the other! She would do her duty, let Bessy be ever so sweet. The girl must be made to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison⁠—or must be made to go.</p>
				<p>But whither should she go, and if that “whither” should be found, how should Philip be prevented from following her? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, in her agony, conceived an idea that it would be easier to deal with the girl herself than with Philip. A woman, if she thinks it to be a duty, will more readily sacrifice herself in the performance of it than will a man. So at least thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, judging from her own feelings; and Bessy was very good, very affectionate, very grateful, had always been obedient. If possible she should be driven into the arms of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison. Should she stand firm against such efforts as could be made in that direction, then an appeal should be made to herself. After all that had been done for her, would she ruin the family of the Launays for the mere whim of her own heart?</p>
				<p>During the process of driving her into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison’s arms⁠—a process which from first to last was altogether hopeless⁠—not a word had been said about Philip. But Bessy understood the reticence. She had been asked as to her promise to Philip, and never forgot that she had been asked. Nor did she ever forget those words which at the moment so displeased her⁠—“You have grown to be the loveliest woman that I have ever looked upon.” She remembered now that he had held her hand tightly while he had spoken them, and that an effort had been necessary as she withdrew it. She had been perfectly serious in decrying the personal compliment; but still, still, there had been a flavour of love in the words which now remained among her heartstrings. Of course he was not her brother⁠—not even her cousin. There was not a touch of blood between them to warrant such a compliment as a joke. He, as a young man, had told her that he thought her, as a young woman, to be lovely above all others. She was quite sure of this⁠—that no possible amount of driving should drive her into the arms of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison.</p>
				<p>The old woman became more and more stern. “Dear aunt,” Bessy said to her one day, with an air of firmness which had evidently been assumed purposely for the occasion, “indeed, indeed, I cannot love <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison.” Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had resolved that she must resort to the other alternative. Bessy must go. She did believe that when everything should be explained Bessy herself would raise no difficulty as to her own going. Bessy had no more right to live at Launay than had any other fatherless, motherless, penniless living creature. But how to explain it? What reason should be given? And whither should the girl be sent?</p>
				<p>Then there came delay, caused by another great trouble. On a sudden <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was very ill. This began about the end of May, when Philip was still up in London inhaling the incense which came up from the success of his book. At first she was very eager that her son should not be recalled to Launay. “Why should a young man be brought into the house with a sick old woman?” Of course she was eager. What evils might not happen if they two were brought together during her illness? At the end of three weeks, however, she was worse⁠—so much worse that the people around her were afraid; and it became manifest to all of them that the truth must be told to Philip in spite of her injunctions. Bessy’s position became one of great difficulty, because words fell from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles which explained to her almost with accuracy the condition of her aunt’s mind. “You should not be here,” she said over and over again. Now, it had been the case, as a matter of course, that Bessy, during the old lady’s illness, had never left her bedside day or night. Of course she had been the nurse, of course she had tended the invalid in everything. It had been so much a matter of course that the poor lady had been impotent to prevent it, in her ineffectual efforts to put an end to Bessy’s influence. The servants, even the doctors, obeyed Bessy in regard to the household matters. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles found herself quite unable to repel Bessy from her bedside. And then, with her mind always intent on the necessity of keeping the young people apart, and when it was all but settled that Philip should be summoned, she said again and again, “You should not be here, Bessy. You must not be here, Bessy.”</p>
				<p>But whither should she go? No place was even suggested to her. And were she herself to consult some other friend as to a place⁠—the clergyman of their own parish for instance, who out of that house was her most intimate friend⁠—she would have to tell the whole story, a story which could not be told by her lips. Philip had never said a word to her, except that one word: “You have grown to be the loveliest woman that ever I looked upon.” The word was very frequent in her thoughts, but she could tell no one of that!</p>
				<p>If he did think her lovely, if he did love her, why should not things run smoothly? She had found it to be quite out of the question that she should be driven into the arms of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison, but she soon came to own to herself that she might easily be enticed into those other arms. But then perhaps he had meant nothing⁠—so probably had meant nothing! But if not, why should she be driven away from Launay? As her aunt became worse and worse, and when Philip came down from London, and with Philip a London physician, nothing was settled about poor Bessy, and nothing was done. When Philip and Bessy stood together at the sick woman’s bedside she was nearly insensible, wandering in her mind, but still with that care heavy at her heart. “No, Philip; no, no, no,” she said. “What is it, mother?” asked Philip. Then Bessy escaped from the room and resolved that she would always be absent when Philip was by his mother’s bedside.</p>
				<p>There was a week in which the case was almost hopeless; and then a week during which the mistress of Launay crept slowly back to life. It could not but be that they two should see much of each other during such weeks. At every meal they sat together. Bessy was still constant at the bedside of her aunt, but now and again she was alone with Philip. At first she struggled to avoid him, but she struggled altogether in vain. He would not be avoided. And then of course he spoke. “Bessy, I am sure you know that I love you.”</p>
				<p>“I am sure I hope you do,” she replied, purposely misinterpreting him.</p>
				<p>Then he frowned at her. “I am sure, Bessy, you are above all subterfuges.”</p>
				<p>“What subterfuges? Why do you say that?”</p>
				<p>“You are no sister of mine; no cousin even. You know what I mean when I say that I love you. Will you be my wife?”</p>
				<p>Oh! if she might only have knelt at his feet and hidden her face among her hands, and have gladly answered him with a little “Yes,” extracted from amidst her happy blushes! But, in every way, there was no time for such joys. “Philip, think how ill your mother is,” she said.</p>
				<p>“That cannot change it. I have to ask you whether you can love me. I am bound to ask you whether you will love me.” She would not answer him then; but during that second week in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was creeping back to life she swore that she did love him, and would love him, and would be true to him forever and ever.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Owned That She Was Engaged</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>When these pretty oaths had been sworn, and while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was too ill to keep her eyes upon them or to separate them, of course the two lovers were much together. For whispering words of love, for swearing oaths, for sweet kisses and looking into each other’s eyes, a few minutes now and again will give ample opportunities. The long hours of the day and night were passed by Bessy with her aunt; but there were short moments, heavenly moments, which sufficed to lift her off the earth into an Elysium of joy. His love for her was so perfect, so assured! “In a matter such as this,” he said in his fondly serious air, “my mother can have no right to interfere with me.”</p>
				<p>“But with me she may,” said Bessy, foreseeing in the midst of her Paradise the storm which would surely come.</p>
				<p>“Why should she wish to do so? Why should she not allow me to make myself happy in the only way in which it is possible?” There was such an ecstasy of bliss coming from such words as these, such a perfection of the feeling of mutual love, that she could not but be exalted to the heavens, although she knew that the storm would surely come. If her love would make him happy, then, then, surely he should be happy. “Of course she has given up her idea about that parson,” he said.</p>
				<p>“I fear she has not, Philip.”</p>
				<p>“It seems to me too monstrous that any human being should go to work and settle whom two other human beings are to marry.”</p>
				<p>“There was never a possibility of that.”</p>
				<p>“She told me it was to be so.”</p>
				<p>“It never could have been,” said Bessy with great emphasis. “Not even for her, much as I love her⁠—not even for her to whom I owe everything⁠—could I consent to marry a man I did not love. But⁠—”</p>
				<p>“But what?”</p>
				<p>“I do not know how I shall answer her when she bids me give you up. Oh, my love, how shall I answer her?”</p>
				<p>Then he told her at considerable length what was the answer which he thought should in such circumstances be made to his mother. Bessy was to declare that nothing could alter her intentions, that her own happiness and that of her lover depended on her firmness, and that they two did, in fact, intend to have their own way in this matter sooner or later. Bessy, as she heard the lesson, made no direct reply, but she knew too well that it could be of no service to her. All that it would be possible for her to say, when the resolute old woman should declare her purpose, would be that come what might she must always love Philip Launay; that she never, never, never could become the wife of any other man. So much she thought she would say. But as to asserting her right to her lover, that she was sure would be beyond her.</p>
				<p>Everyone in the house except <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was aware that Philip and Bessy were lovers, and from the dependents of the house the tidings spread through the parish. There had been no special secrecy. A lover does not usually pronounce his vows in public. Little half-lighted corners and twilight hours are chosen, or banks beneath the trees supposed to be safe from vulgar eyes, or lonely wanderings. Philip had followed the usual way of the world in his lovemaking, but had sought his secret moments with no special secrecy. Before the servants he would whisper to Bessy with that look of thorough confidence in his eyes which servants completely understand; and thus while the poor old woman was still in her bed, while she was unaware both of the danger and of her own immediate impotence, the secret⁠—as far as it was a secret⁠—became known to all Launay. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison heard it over at Budcombe, and, with his heart down in his boots, told himself that now certainly there could be no chance for him. At Launay <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory was the rector, and it was with his daughters that Bessy had become intimate. Knowing much of the mind of the first lady of the parish, he took upon himself to say a word or two to Philip. “I am so glad to hear that your mother is much better this morning.”</p>
				<p>“Very much better.”</p>
				<p>“It has been a most serious illness.”</p>
				<p>“Terribly serious, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory.”</p>
				<p>Then there was a pause, and sundry other faltering allusions were made to the condition of things up at the house, from which Philip was aware that words of counsel or perhaps reproach were coming. “I hope you will excuse me, Philip, if I tell you something.”</p>
				<p>“I think I shall excuse anything from you.”</p>
				<p>“People are saying about the place that during your mother’s illness you have engaged yourself to Bessy Pryor.”</p>
				<p>“That’s very odd,” said Philip.</p>
				<p>“Odd!” repeated the parson.</p>
				<p>“Very odd indeed, because what the people about the place say is always supposed to be untrue. But this report is true.”</p>
				<p>“It is true?”</p>
				<p>“Quite true, and I am proud to be in a position to assure you that I have been accepted. I am really sorry for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison, you know.”</p>
				<p>“But what will your mother say?”</p>
				<p>“I do not think that she or anyone can say that Bessy is not fit to be the wife of the finest gentleman in the land.” This he said with an air of pride which showed plainly enough that he did not intend to be talked out of his purpose.</p>
				<p>“I should not have spoken, but that your dear mother is so ill,” rejoined the parson.</p>
				<p>“I understand that. I must fight my own battle and Bessy’s as best I may. But you may be quite sure, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory, that I mean to fight it.”</p>
				<p>Nor did Bessy deny the fact when her friend Mary Gregory interrogated her. The question of Bessy’s marriage with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison had, somewhat cruelly in regard to her and more cruelly still in regard to the gentleman, become public property in the neighbourhood. Everybody had known that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles intended to marry Bessy to the parson of Budcombe, and everybody had thought that Bessy would, as a matter of course, accept her destiny. Everybody now knew that Bessy had rebelled; and, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles’s autocratic disposition was well understood, everybody was waiting to see what would come of it. The neighbourhood generally thought that Bessy was unreasonable and ungrateful. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison was a very nice man, and nothing could have been more appropriate. Now, when the truth came out, everybody was very much interested indeed. That <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles should assent to a marriage between the heir and Bessy Pryor was quite out of the question. She was too well known to leave a doubt on the mind of anyone either in Launay or Budcombe on that matter. Men and women drew their breath and looked at each other. It was just when the parishes thought that she was going to die that the parishioners first heard that Bessy would not marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison because of the young squire. And now, when it was known that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was not going to die, it was known that the young squire was absolutely engaged to Bessy Pryor. “There’ll be a deal o’ vat in the voir,” said the old head ploughman of Launay, talking over the matter with the wife of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory’s gardener. There was going to be “a deal of fat in the fire.”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was not like other mothers. Everything in respect to present income was in her hands. And Bessy was not like other girls. She had absolutely no “<i xml:lang="la">locus standi</i>” in the world, except what came to her from the bounty of the old lady. By favour of the Lady of Launay she held her head among the girls of that part of the country as high as any girl there. She was only Bessy Pryor; but, from love and kindness, she was the recognised daughter of the house of Launay. Everybody knew it all. Everybody was aware that she had done much towards reaching her present position by her own special sweetness. But should <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles once frown, Bessy would be nobody. “Oh, Bessy, how is this all to be?” asked Mary Gregory.</p>
				<p>“As God pleases,” said Bessy, very solemnly.</p>
				<p>“What does <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles say?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t want anybody to ask me about it,” said Bessy. “Of course I love him. What is the good of denying it? But I cannot talk about it.” Then Mary Gregory looked as though some terrible secret had been revealed to her⁠—some secret of which the burden might probably be too much for her to bear.</p>
				<p>The first storm arose from an interview which took place between the mother and son as soon as the mother found herself able to speak on a subject which was near her heart. She sent for him and once again besought him to take steps towards that combining of the properties which was so essential to the Launay interests generally. Then he declared his purpose very plainly. He did not intend to combine the properties. He did not care for the red-haired Launay cousin. It was his intention to marry⁠—Bessy Pryor; yes⁠—he had proposed to her and she had accepted him. The poor sick mother was at first almost overwhelmed with despair. “What can I do but tell you the truth when you ask me?” he said.</p>
				<p>“Do!” she screamed. “What could you do? You could have remembered your honour! You could have remembered your blood! You could have remembered your duty!” Then she bade him leave her, and after an hour passed in thought she sent for Bessy. “I have had my son with me,” she said, sitting bolt upright in her bed, looking awful in her wanness, speaking with low, studied, harsh voice, with her two hands before her on the counterpane. “I have had my son with me and he has told me.” Bessy felt that she was trembling. She was hardly able to support herself. She had not a word to say. The sick old woman was terrible in her severity. “Is it true?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, it is true,” whispered Bessy.</p>
				<p>“And this is to be my return?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, my dearest, my darling, oh, my aunt, dear, dearest, dearest aunt! Do not speak like that! Do not look at me like that! You know I love you. Don’t you know I love you?” Then Bessy prostrated herself on the bed, and getting hold of the old woman’s hand covered it with kisses. Yes, her aunt did know that the girl loved her, and she knew that she loved the girl perhaps better than any other human being in the world. The eldest son had become estranged from her. Even Philip had not been half so much to her as this girl. Bessy had wound herself round her very heartstrings. It made her happy even to sit and look at Bessy. She had denied herself all pretty things; but this prettiest of all things had grown up beneath her eyes. She did not draw away her hand; but, while her hand was being kissed, she made up her mind that she would do her duty.</p>
				<p>“Of what service will be your love,” she said, “if this is to be my return?” Bessy could only lie and sob and hide her face. “Say that you will give it up.” Not to say that, not to give him up, was the only resolution at which Bessy had arrived. “If you will not say so, you must leave me, and I shall send you word what you are to do. If you are my enemy you shall not remain here.”</p>
				<p>“Pray⁠—pray do not call me an enemy.”</p>
				<p>“You had better go.” The woman’s voice as she said this was dreadful in its harshness. Then Bessy, slowly creeping down from the bed, slowly slunk out of the room.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Ceased to Be a Young Lady of Importance</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>When the old woman was alone she at once went to work in her own mind resolving what should be her course of proceeding. To yield in the matter, and to confirm the happiness of the young people, never occurred to her. Again and again she repeated to herself that she would do her duty; and again and again she repeated to herself that in allowing Philip and Bessy to come together she had neglected her duty. That her duty required her to separate them, in spite of their love, in spite of their engagement, though all the happiness of their lives might depend upon it, she did not in the least doubt. Duty is duty. And it was her duty to aggrandise the house of Launay, so that the old autocracy of the land might, so far as in her lay, be preserved. That it would be a good and pious thing to do⁠—to keep them apart, to force Philip to marry the girl in Cornwall, to drive Bessy into <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison’s arms, was to her so certain that it required no further thought. She had never indulged herself. Her life had been so led as to maintain the power of her own order, and relieve the wants of those below her. She had done nothing for her own pleasure. How should it occur to her that it would be well for her to change the whole course of her life in order that she might administer to the joys of a young man and a young woman?</p>
				<p>It did not occur to her to do so. Lying thus all alone, white, sick, and feeble, but very strong of heart, she made her resolutions. As Bessy could not well be sent out of the house till a home should be provided for her elsewhere, Philip should be made to go. As that was to be the first step, she again sent for Philip that day. “No, mother; not while you are so ill.” This he said in answer to her first command that he should leave Launay at once. It had not occurred to him that the house in which he had been born and bred, the house of his ancestors, the house which he had always supposed was at some future day to be his own, was not free to him. But, feeble as she was, she soon made him understand her purpose. He must go⁠—because she ordered him, because the house was hers and not his, because he was no longer welcome there as a guest unless he would promise to abandon Bessy. “This is tyranny, mother,” he said.</p>
				<p>“I do not mean to argue the question,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, leaning back among the pillows, gaunt, with hollow cheeks, yellow with her long sickness, seeming to be all eyes as she looked at him. “I tell you that you must go.”</p>
				<p>“Mother!”</p>
				<p>Then, at considerable length, she explained her intended arrangements. He must go, and live upon the very modest income which she proposed. At any rate he must go, and go at once. The house was hers, and she would not have him there. She would have no one in the house who disputed her will. She had been an overindulgent mother to him, and this had been the return made to her! She had condescended to explain to him her intention in regard to Bessy, and he had immediately resolved to thwart her. When she was dead and gone it might perhaps be in his power to ruin the family if he chose. As to that she would take further thought. But she, as long as she lived, would do her duty. “I suppose I may understand,” she said, “that you will leave Launay early after breakfast tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>“Do you mean to turn me out of the house?”</p>
				<p>“I do,” she said, looking full at him, all eyes, with her grey hair coming dishevelled from under the large frill of her nightcap, with cheeks gaunt and yellow. Her extended hands were very thin. She had been very near death, and seemed, as he gazed at her, to be very near it now. If he went it might be her fate never to see him again.</p>
				<p>“I cannot leave you like this,” he said.</p>
				<p>“Then obey me.”</p>
				<p>“Why should we not be married, mother?”</p>
				<p>“I will not argue. You know as well as I do. Will you obey me?”</p>
				<p>“Not in this, mother. I could not do so without perjuring myself.”</p>
				<p>“Then go you out of this house at once.” She was sitting now bolt upright on her bed, supporting herself on her hands behind her. The whole thing was so dreadful that he could not endure to prolong the interview, and he left the room.</p>
				<p>Then there came a message from the old housekeeper to Bessy, forbidding her to leave her own room. It was thus that Bessy first understood that her great sin was to be made public to all the household. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, who was the head of the domestics, had been told, and now felt that a sort of authority over Bessy had been confided to her. “No, Miss Bessy; you are not to go into her room at all. She says that she will not see you till you promise to be said by her.”</p>
				<p>“But why, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl?”</p>
				<p>“Well, miss; I suppose it’s along of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Philip. But you know that better than me. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Philip is to go tomorrow morning and never come back any more.”</p>
				<p>“Never come back to Launay?”</p>
				<p>“Not while things is as they is, miss. But you are to stay here and not go out at all. That’s what Madam says.” The servants about the place all called <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles Madam.</p>
				<p>There was a potency about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles which enabled her to have her will carried out, although she was lying ill in bed⁠—to have her will carried out as far as the immediate severance of the lovers was concerned. When the command had been brought by the mouth of a servant, Bessy determined that she would not see Philip again before he went. She understood that she was bound by her position, bound by gratitude, bound by a sense of propriety, to so much obedience as that. No earthly authority could be sufficient to make her abandon her troth. In that she could not allow even her aunt to sway her⁠—her aunt though she were sick and suffering, even though she were dying! Both her love and her vow were sacred to her. But obedience at the moment she did owe, and she kept her room. Philip came to the door, but she sat mute and would not speak to him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, when she brought her some food, asked her whether she intended to obey the order. “Your aunt wants a promise from you, Miss Bessy?”</p>
				<p>“I am sure my aunt knows that I shall obey her,” said Bessy.</p>
				<p>On the following morning Philip left the house. He sent a message to his mother, asking whether she would see him; but she refused. “I think you had better not disturb her, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Philip,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl. Then he went, and as the wagonette took him away from the door, Bessy sat and listened to the sound of the wheels on the gravel.</p>
				<p>All that day and all the next passed on and she was not allowed to see her aunt. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl repeated that she could not take upon herself to say that Madam was better. No doubt the worry of the last day or two had been a great trouble to her. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl grew much in self-importance at the time, and felt that she was overtopping Miss Bessy in the affairs of Launay.</p>
				<p>It was no less true than singular that all the sympathies of the place should be on the side of the old woman. Her illness probably had something to do with it. And then she had been so autocratic, all Launay and Budcombe had been so accustomed to bow down to her, that rebellion on the part of anyone seemed to be shocking. And who was Bessy Pryor that she should dare to think of marrying the heir? Who, even, was the supposed heir that he should dare to think of marrying anyone in opposition to the actual owner of the acres? Heir though he was called, he was not necessarily the heir. She might do as she pleased with all Launay and all Budcombe, and there were those who thought that if Philip was still obstinate she would leave everything to her elder son. She did not love her elder son. In these days she never saw him. He was a gay man of the world, who had never been dutiful to her. But he might take the name of Launay, and the family would be perpetuated as well that way as the other. Philip was very foolish. And as for Bessy; Bessy was worse than foolish. That was the verdict of the place generally.</p>
				<p>I think Launay liked it. The troubles of our neighbours are generally endurable, and any subject for conversation is a blessing. Launay liked the excitement; but, nevertheless, felt itself to be compressed into whispers and a solemn demeanour. The Gregory girls were solemn, conscious of the iniquity of their friend, and deeply sensitive of the danger to which poor Philip was exposed. When a rumour came to the vicarage that a fly had been up at the great house, it was immediately conceived that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jones, the lawyer from Taunton, had been sent for, with a view to an alteration of the will. This suddenness, this anger, this disruption of all things was dreadful! But when it was discovered that the fly contained no one but the doctor there was disappointment.</p>
				<p>On the third day there came a message from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles to the rector. Would <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory step up and see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles? Then it was thought at the rectory that the dear old lady was again worse, and that she had sent for her clergyman that she might receive the last comforts of religion. But this again was wrong. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory,” she said very suddenly, “I want to consult you as to a future home for Bessy Pryor.”</p>
				<p>“Must she go from this?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; she must go from this. You have heard, perhaps, about her and my son.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory acknowledged that he had heard. “Of course she must go. I cannot have Philip banished from the house which is to be his own. In this matter he probably has been the most to blame.”</p>
				<p>“They have both, perhaps, been foolish.”</p>
				<p>“It is wickedness rather than folly. But he has been the wickeder. It should have been a duty to him, a great duty, and he should have been the stronger. But he is my son, and I cannot banish him.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no!”</p>
				<p>“But they must not be brought together. I love Bessy Pryor dearly, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory; oh, so dearly! Since she came to me, now so many years ago, she has been like a gleam of sunlight in the house. She has always been gentle with me. The very touch of her hand is sweet to me. But I must not on that account sacrifice the honour of the family. I have a duty to do; and I must do it, though I tear my heart in pieces. Where can I send her?”</p>
				<p>“Permanently?”</p>
				<p>“Well, yes; permanently. If Philip were married, of course she might come back. But I will still trust that she herself may be married first. I do not mean to cast her off;⁠—only she must go. Anything that may be wanting in money shall be paid for her. She shall be provided for comfortably. You know what I had hoped about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison. Perhaps he may even yet be able to persuade her; but it must be away from here. Where can I send her?”</p>
				<p>This was a question not very easy to answer, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory said that he must take time to think of it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, when she asked the question, was aware that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory had a maiden sister, living at Avranches in Normandy, who was not in opulent circumstances.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Was to Be Banished</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>When a man is asked by his friend if he knows of a horse to be sold he does not like immediately to suggest a transfer of the animal which he has in his own stable, though he may at the moment be in want of money and anxious to sell his steed. So it was with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory. His sister would be delighted to take as a boarder a young lady for whom liberal payment would be made; but at the first moment he had hesitated to make an offer by which his own sister would be benefited. On the next morning, however, he wrote as follows:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles</span>⁠—My sister Amelia is living at Avranches, where she has a pleasant little house on the outskirts of the town, with a garden. An old friend was living with her, but she died last year, and my sister is now alone. If you think that Bessy would like to sojourn for awhile in Normandy, I will write to Amelia and make the proposition. Bessy will find my sister good-tempered and kindhearted.⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Faithfully yours,</span> <span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Joshua Gregory</span>.</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles did not care much for the good temper and the kind heart. Had she asked herself whether she wished Bessy to be happy she would no doubt have answered herself in the affirmative. She would probably have done so in regard to any human being or animal in the world. Of course, she wanted them all to be happy. But happiness was to her thinking of much less importance than duty; and at the present moment her duty and Bessy’s duty and Philip’s duty were so momentous that no idea of happiness ought to be considered in the matter at all. Had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory written to say that his sister was a woman of severe morals, of stern aspect, prone to repress all youthful ebullitions, and supposed to be disagreeable because of her temper, all that would have been no obstacle. In the present condition of things suffering would be better than happiness; more in accord with the feelings and position of the person concerned. It was quite intelligible to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles that Bessy should really love Philip almost to the breaking of her heart, quite intelligible that Philip should have set his mind upon the untoward marriage with all the obstinacy of a proud man. When young men and young women neglect their duty, hearts have to be broken. But it is not a soft and silken operation, which can be made pleasant by good temper and social kindness. It was necessary, for certain quite adequate reasons, that Bessy should be put on the wheel, and be racked and tormented. To talk to her of the good temper of the old woman who would have to turn the wheel would be to lie to her. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles did not want her to think that things could be made pleasant for her.</p>
				<p>Soon after the receipt of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory’s letter she sent for Bessy, who was then brought into the room under the guard, as it were, of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl accompanied her along the corridor, which was surely unnecessary, as Bessy’s door had not been locked upon her. Her imprisonment had only come from obedience. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl felt that a great trust had been confided to her, and was anxious to omit none of her duties. She opened the door so that the invalid on the bed could see that this duty had been done, and then Bessy crept into the room. She crept in, but very quickly, and in a moment had her arms round the old woman’s back and her lips pressed to the old woman’s forehead. “Why may not I come and be with you?” she said.</p>
				<p>“Because you are disobedient.”</p>
				<p>“No, no; I do all that you tell me. I have not stirred from my room, though it was hard to think you were ill so near me, and that I could do nothing. I did not try to say a word to him, or even to look at him; and now that he has gone, why should I not be with you?”</p>
				<p>“It cannot be.”</p>
				<p>“But why not, aunt? Even though you would not speak to me I could be with you. Who is there to read to you?”</p>
				<p>“There is no one. Of course it is dreary. But there are worse things than dreariness.”</p>
				<p>“Why should not I come back, now that he has gone?” She still had her arm round the old woman’s back, and had now succeeded in dragging herself on to the bed and in crouching down by her aunt’s side. It was her perseverance in this fashion that had so often forced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles out of her own ordained method of life, and compelled her to leave for a moment the strictness which was congenial to her. It was this that had made her declare to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory, in the midst of her severity, that Bessy had been like a gleam of sunshine in the house. Even now she knew not how to escape from the softness of an embrace which was in truth so grateful to her. It was a consciousness of this⁠—of the potency of Bessy’s charm even over herself⁠—which had made her hasten to send her away from her. Bessy would read to her all the day, would hold her hand when she was half dozing, would assist in every movement with all the patience and much more than the tenderness of a waiting-maid. There was no voice so sweet, no hand so cool, no memory so mindful, no step so soft as Bessy’s. And now Bessy was there, lying on her bed, caressing her, more closely bound to her than had ever been any other being in the world, and yet Bessy was an enemy from whom it was imperatively necessary that she should be divided.</p>
				<p>“Get down, Bessy,” she said; “go off from me.”</p>
				<p>“No, no, no,” said Bessy, still clinging to her and kissing her.</p>
				<p>“I have that to say to you which must be said calmly.”</p>
				<p>“I am calm⁠—quite calm. I will do whatever you tell me; only pray, pray, do not send me away from you.”</p>
				<p>“You say that you will obey me.”</p>
				<p>“I will; I have. I always have obeyed you.”</p>
				<p>“Will you give up your love for Philip?”</p>
				<p>“Could I give up my love for you, if anybody told me? How can I do it? Love comes of itself. I did not try to love him. Oh, if you could know how I tried not to love him! If somebody came and said I was not to love you, would it be possible?”</p>
				<p>“I am speaking of another love.”</p>
				<p>“Yes; I know. One is a kind of love that is always welcome. The other comes first as a shock, and one struggles to avoid it. But when it has come, how can it be helped? I do love him, better than all the world.” As she said this she raised herself upon the bed, so as to look round upon her aunt’s face; but still she kept her arm upon the old woman’s shoulder. “Is it not natural? How could I have helped it?”</p>
				<p>“You must have known that it was wrong.”</p>
				<p>“No!”</p>
				<p>“You did not know that it would displease me?”</p>
				<p>“I knew that it was unfortunate⁠—not wrong. What did I do that was wrong? When he asked me, could I tell him anything but the truth?”</p>
				<p>“You should have told him nothing.” At this reply Bessy shook her head. “It cannot be that you should think that in such a matter there should be no restraint. Did you expect that I should give my consent to such a marriage? I want to hear from yourself what you thought of my feelings.”</p>
				<p>“I knew you would be angry.”</p>
				<p>“Well?”</p>
				<p>“I knew you must think me unfit to be Philip’s wife.”</p>
				<p>“Well?”</p>
				<p>“I knew that you wanted something else for him, and something else also for me.”</p>
				<p>“And did such knowledge go for nothing?”</p>
				<p>“It made me feel that my love was unfortunate⁠—but not that it was wrong. I could not help it. He had come to me, and I loved him. The other man came, and I could not love him. Why should I be shut up for this in my own room? Why should I be sent away from you, to be miserable because I know that you want things done? He is not here. If he were here and you bade me not to go near him, I would not go. Though he were in the next room I would not see him. I would obey you altogether, but I must love him. And as I love him I cannot love another. You would not wish me to marry a man when my heart has been given to another.”</p>
				<p>The old woman had not at all intended that there should be such arguments as these. It had been her purpose simply to communicate her plan, to tell Bessy that she would have to live probably for a few years at Avranches, and then to send her back to her prison. But Bessy had again got the best of her, and then had come caressing, talking, and excuses. Bessy had been nearly an hour in her room before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had disclosed her purpose, and had hovered round her aunt, doing as had been her wont when she was recognised as having all the powers of head nurse in her hands. Then at last, in a manner very different from that which had been planned, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles proposed the Normandy scheme. She had been, involuntarily, so much softened that she condescended even to repeat what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory had said as to the good temper and general kindness of his maiden sister. “But why should I go?” asked Bessy, almost sobbing.</p>
				<p>“I wonder that you should ask.”</p>
				<p>“He is not here.”</p>
				<p>“But he may come.”</p>
				<p>“If he came ever so I would not see him if you bade me not. I think you hardly understand me, aunt. I will obey you in everything. I am sure you will not now ask me to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison.”</p>
				<p>She could not say that Philip would be more likely to become amenable and marry the Cornish heiress if Bessy were away at Avranches than if she still remained shut up at Launay. But that was her feeling. Philip, she knew, would be less obedient than Bessy. But then, too, Philip might be less obstinate of purpose. “You cannot live here, Bessy, unless you will say that you will never become the wife of my son.”</p>
				<p>“Never?”</p>
				<p>“Never!”</p>
				<p>“I cannot say that.” There was a long pause before she found the courage to pronounce these words, but she did pronounce them at last.</p>
				<p>“Then you must go.”</p>
				<p>“I may stay and nurse you till you are well. Let me do that. I will go whenever you may bid me.”</p>
				<p>“No. There shall be no terms between us. We must be friends, Bessy, or we must be enemies. We cannot be friends as long as you hold yourself to be engaged to Philip Launay. While that is so I will not take a cup of water from your hands. No, no,” for the girl was again trying to embrace her. “I will not have your love, nor shall you have mine.”</p>
				<p>“My heart would break were I to say it.”</p>
				<p>“Then let it break! Is my heart not broken? What is it though our hearts do break⁠—what is it though we die⁠—if we do our duty? You owe this for what I have done for you.”</p>
				<p>“I owe you everything.”</p>
				<p>“Then say that you will give him up.”</p>
				<p>“I owe you everything, except this. I will not speak to him, I will not write to him, I will not even look at him, but I will not give him up. When one loves, one cannot give it up.” Then she was ordered to go back to her room, and back to her room she went.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Was Banished to Normandy</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>There was nothing for it but to go, after the interview described in the last chapter. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles sent a message to the obstinate girl, informing her that she need not any longer consider herself as a prisoner, but that she had better prepare her clothes so as to be ready to start within a week. The necessary correspondence had taken place between Launay and Avranches, and within ten days from the time at which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory had made the proposition⁠—in less than a fortnight from the departure of her lover⁠—Bessy came down from her room all equipped, and took her place in the same wagonette which so short a time before had taken her lover away from her. During the week she had had liberty to go where she pleased, except into her aunt’s room. But she had, in truth, been almost as much a prisoner as before. She did for a few minutes each day go out into the garden, but she would not go beyond the garden into the park, nor did she accept an invitation from the Gregory girls to spend an evening at the rectory. It would be so necessary, one of them wrote, that everything should be told to her as to the disposition and ways of life of Aunt Amelia! But Bessy would not see the Gregory girls. She was being sent away from home because of the wickedness of her love, and all Launay knew it. In such a condition of things she could not go out to eat sally-lunn and pound-cake, and to be told of the delights of a small Norman town. She would not even see the Gregory girls when they came up to the house, but wrote an affectionate note to the elder of them explaining that her misery was too great to allow her to see any friend.</p>
				<p>She was in truth very miserable. It was not only because of her love, from which she had from the first been aware that misery must come⁠—undoubted misery, if not misery that would last through her whole life. But now there was added to this the sorrow of absolute banishment from her aunt. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles would not see her again before she started. Bessy was well aware of all that she owed to the mistress of Launay; and, being intelligent in the reading of character, was aware also that through many years she had succeeded in obtaining from the old woman more than the intended performance of an undertaken duty. She had forced the old woman to love her, and was aware that by means of that love the old woman’s life had been brightened. She had not only received, but had conferred kindness⁠—and it is by conferring kindness that love is created. It was an agony to her that she should be compelled to leave this dearest friend, who was still sick and infirm, without seeing her. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was inexorable. These four words written on a scrap of paper were brought to her on that morning:⁠—“Pray, pray, see me!” She was still inexorable. There had been long pencil-written notes between them on the previous day. If Bessy would pledge herself to give up her lover all might yet be changed. The old woman at Avranches should be compensated for her disappointment. Bessy should be restored to all her privileges at Launay. “You shall be my own, own child,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. She condescended even to promise that not a word more should be said about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison. But Bessy also could be inexorable. “I cannot say that I will give him up,” she wrote. Thus it came to pass that she had to get into the wagonette without seeing her old friend. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl went with her, having received instructions to wait upon Miss Bessy all the way to Avranches. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl felt that she was sent as a guard against the lover. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had known Bessy too well to have fear of that kind, and had sent <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl as general guardian against the wild beasts which are supposed to be roaming about the world in quest of unprotected young females.</p>
				<p>In the distribution of her anger <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had for the moment been very severe towards Philip as to pecuniary matters. He had chosen to be rebellious, and therefore he was not only turned out of the house, but told that he must live on an uncomfortably small income. But to Bessy <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was liberal. She had astounded Miss Gregory by the nobility of the terms she had proposed, and on the evening before the journey had sent ten five-pound notes in a blank envelope to Bessy. Then in a subsequent note she had said that a similar sum would be paid to her every half-year. In none of these notes was there any expression of endearment. To none of them was there even a signature. But they all conveyed evidence of the amount of thought which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was giving to Bessy and her affairs.</p>
				<p>Bessy’s journey was very comfortless. She had learned to hate <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, who assumed all the airs of a duenna. She would not leave Bessy out of sight for a moment, as though Philip might have been hidden behind every curtain or under every table. Once or twice the duenna made a little attempt at persuasion herself: “It ain’t no good, miss, and it had better be give up.” Then Bessy looked at her, and desired that she might be left alone. This had been at the hotel at Dover. Then again <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl spoke as the carriage was approaching Avranches: “If you wish to come back, Miss Bessy, the way is open.” “Never mind my wishes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl,” said Bessy. When, on her return to Launay, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl once attempted to intimate to her mistress that Miss Bessy was very obstinate, she was silenced so sternly, so shortly, that the housekeeper began to doubt whether she might not have made a mistake and whether Bessy would not at last prevail. It was evident that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles would not hear a word against Bessy.</p>
				<p>On her arrival at Avranches Miss Gregory was very kind to her. She found that she was received not at all as a naughty girl who had been sent away from home in order that she might be subjected to severe treatment. Miss Gregory fulfilled all the promises which her brother had made on her behalf, and was thoroughly kind and good-tempered. For nearly a month not a word was said about Philip or the love affairs. It seemed to be understood that Bessy had come to Avranches quite at her own desire. She was introduced to the genteel society with which that place abounds, and was conscious that a much freer life was vouchsafed to her than she had ever known before. At Launay she had of course been subject to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. Now she was subject to no one. Miss Gregory exercised no authority over her⁠—was indeed rather subject to Bessy, as being recipient of the money paid for Bessy’s board and lodging.</p>
				<p>But by the end of the month there had grown up so much of friendship between the elder and the younger lady, that something came to be said about Philip. It was impossible that Bessy should be silent as to her past life. By degrees she told all that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had done for her; how she herself had been a penniless orphan; how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had taken her in from simple charity; how love had grown up between them two⁠—the warmest, truest love; and then how that other love had grown! The telling of secrets begets the telling of secrets. Miss Gregory, though she was now old, with the marks of little feeble crow’s-feet round her gentle eyes, though she wore a false front and was much withered, had also had her love affair. She took delight in pouring forth her little tale; how she had loved an officer and had been beloved; how there had been no money; how the officer’s parents had besought her to set the officer free, so that he might marry money; how she had set the officer free, and how, in consequence, the officer had married money and was now a major-general, with a large family, a comfortable house, and the gout. “And I have always thought it was right,” said the excellent spinster. “What could I have done for him?”</p>
				<p>“It couldn’t be right if he loved you best,” said Bessy.</p>
				<p>“Why not, my dear? He has made an excellent husband. Perhaps he didn’t love me best when he stood at the altar.”</p>
				<p>“I think love should be more holy.”</p>
				<p>“Mine has been very holy⁠—to me, myself. For a time I wept; but now I think I am happier than if I had never seen him. It adds something to one’s life to have been loved once.”</p>
				<p>Bessy, who was of a stronger temperament, told herself that happiness such as that would not suffice for her. She wanted not only to be happy herself, but also to make him so. In the simplicity of her heart she wondered whether Philip would be different from that easy-changing major-general; but in the strength of her heart she was sure he would be very different. She would certainly not release him at the request of any parent;⁠—but he should be free as air at the slightest hint of a request from himself. She did not believe for a moment that such a request would come; but, if it did⁠—if it did⁠—then there should be no difficulty. Then would she submit to banishment⁠—at Avranches or elsewhere as it might be decided for her⁠—till it might please the Lord to release her from her troubles.</p>
				<p>At the end of six weeks Miss Gregory knew the whole secret of Philip and Bessy’s love, and knew also that Bessy was quite resolved to persevere. There were many discussions about love, in which Bessy always clung to the opinion that when it was once offered and taken, given and received, it ought to be held as more sacred than any other bond. She owed much to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles;⁠—she acknowledged that;⁠—but she thought that she owed more to Philip. Miss Gregory would never quite agree with her;⁠—was strong in her own opinion that women are born to yield and suffer and live mutilated lives, like herself; but not the less did they become fast friends. At the end of six weeks it was determined between them that Bessy should write to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had signified her wish not to be written to, and had not herself written. Messages as to the improving state of her health had come from the Gregory girls, but no letter had as yet passed. Then Bessy wrote as follows, in direct disobedience to her aunt’s orders:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dearest Aunt</span>⁠—I cannot help writing a line because I am so anxious about you. Mary Gregory says you have been up and out on the lawn in the sunshine, but it would make me so happy if I could see the words in your own dear handwriting. Do send me one little word. And though I know what you told me, still I think you will be glad to hear that your poor affectionate loving Bessy is well. I will not say that I am quite happy. I cannot be quite happy away from Launay and you. But Miss Gregory has been very, very kind to me, and there are nice people here. We live almost as quietly as at Launay, but sometimes we see the people. I am reading German and making lace, and I try not to be idle.</p>
					<p>Goodbye, dear, dearest aunt. Try to think kindly of me. I pray for you every morning and night. If you will send me a little note from yourself it will fill me with joy.⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most affectionate and devoted niece,</span></p>
					<footer role="presentation">
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Bessy Pryor.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>This was brought up to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles when she was still in bed, for as yet she had not returned to the early hours of her healthy life. When she had read it she at first held it apart from her. Then she put it close to her bosom, and wept bitterly as she thought how void of sunshine the house had been since that gleam had been turned away from it.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Received Two Letters from Launay</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>The same post brought Bessy two letters from England about the middle of August, both of which the reader shall see;⁠—but first shall be given that which Bessy read the last. It was from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, and had been sent when she was beginning to think that her aunt was still resolved not to write to her. The letter was as follows, and was written on square paper, which in these days is only used even by the old-fashioned when the letter to be sent is supposed to be one of great importance.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear Bessy</span>⁠—Though I had told you not to write to me, still I am glad to hear that you are well, and that your new home has been made as comfortable for you as circumstances will permit. Launay has not been comfortable since you went. I miss you very much. You have become so dear to me that my life is sad without you. My days have never been bright, but now they are less so than ever. I should scruple to admit so much as this to you, were it not that I intend it as a prelude to that which will follow.</p>
					<p>We have been sent into this world, my child, that we may do our duties, independent of that fleeting feeling which we call happiness. In the smaller affairs of life I am sure you would never seek a pleasure at the cost of your conscience. If not in the smaller things, then certainly should you not do so in the greater. To deny yourself, to remember the welfare of others, when temptation is urging you to do wrong, then do that which you know to be right⁠—that is your duty as a Christian, and especially your duty as a woman. To sacrifice herself is the special heroism which a woman can achieve. Men who are called upon to work may gratify their passions and still be heroes. A woman can soar only by suffering.</p>
					<p>You will understand why I tell you this. I and my son have been born into a special degree of life which I think it to be my duty and his to maintain. It is not that I or that he may enjoy any special delights that I hold fast to this opinion, but that I may do my part towards maintaining that order of things which has made my country more blessed than others. It would take me long to explain all this, but I know you will believe me when I say that an imperative sense of duty is my guide. You have not been born into that degree. That this does not affect my own personal feeling to you, you must know. You have had many signs how dear you are to me. At this moment my days are heavy to bear because I have not my Bessy with me⁠—my Bessy who has been so good to me, so loving, such an infinite blessing that to see the hem of her garments, to hear the sound of her foot, has made things bright around me. Now, there is nothing to see, nothing to hear, that is not unsightly and harsh of sound. Oh, Bessy, if you could come back to me!</p>
					<p>But I have to do that duty of which I have spoken, and I shall do it. Though I were never to see you again I shall do it. I am used to suffering, and sometimes think it wrong even to wish that you were back with me. But I write to you thus that you may understand everything. If you will say that you will give him up, you shall return to me and be my own, own beloved child. I tell you that you are not of the same degree. I am bound to tell you so. But you shall be so near my heart that nothing shall separate us.</p>
					<p>You two cannot marry while I am living. I do not think it possible that you should be longing to be made happy by my death. And you should remember that he cannot be the first to break away from this foolish engagement without dishonour. As he is the wealthy one, and the higher born, and as he is the man, he ought not to be the first to say the word. You may say it without falsehood and without disgrace. You may say it, and all the world will know that you have been actuated only by a sense of duty. It will be acknowledged that you have sacrificed yourself⁠—as it becomes a woman to do.</p>
					<p>One word from you will be enough to assure me. Since you came to me you have never been false. One word, and you shall come back to me and to Launay, my friend and my treasure! If it be that there must be suffering, we will suffer together. If tears are necessary there shall be joint tears. Though I am old still I can understand. I will acknowledge the sacrifice. But, Bessy, my Bessy, dearest Bessy, the sacrifice must be made.</p>
					<p>Of course he must live away from Launay for awhile. The fault will have been his, and what of inconvenience there may be he must undergo. He shall not come here till you yourself shall say that you can bear his presence without an added sorrow.</p>
					<p>I know you will not let this letter be in vain. I know you will think it over deeply, and that you will not keep me too long waiting for an answer. I need hardly tell you that I am</p>
					<footer role="presentation">
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your most loving friend,</p>
						<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Miles.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>When Bessy was reading this, when the strong words with which her aunt had pleaded her cause were harrowing her heart, she had clasped in her hand this other letter from her lover. This too was written from Launay.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My own dearest Bessy</span>⁠—It is absolutely only now that I have found out where you are, and have done so simply because the people at the rectory could not keep the secret. Can anything be more absurd than supposing that my mother can have her way by whisking you away, and shutting you up in Normandy? It is too foolish! She has sent for me, and I have come like a dutiful son. I have, indeed, been rejoiced to see her looking again so much like herself. But I have not extended my duty to obeying her in a matter in which my own future happiness is altogether bound up; and in which, perhaps, the happiness of another person may be slightly concerned. I have told her that I would venture to say nothing of the happiness of the other person. The other person might be indifferent, though I did not believe it was so; but I was quite sure of my own. I have assured her that I know what I want myself, and that I do not mean to abandon my hope of achieving it. I know that she is writing to you. She can of course say what she pleases.</p>
					<p>The idea of separating two people who are as old as you and I, and who completely know our own minds⁠—you see that I do not really doubt as to yours⁠—is about as foolish as anything well can be. It is as though we were going back half a dozen centuries into the tyrannies of the middle ages. My object shall be to induce her to let you come home and be married properly from Launay. If she will not consent by the end of this month I shall go over to you, and we must contrive to be married at Avranches. When the thing has been once done all this rubbish will be swept away. I do not believe for a moment that my mother will punish us by any injustice as to money.</p>
					<p>Write and tell me that you agree with me, and be sure that I shall remain, as I am, always altogether your own,</p>
					<footer role="presentation">
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Truly and affectionately,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Philip Miles.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>When Bessy Pryor began to consider these two letters together, she felt that the task was almost too much for her. Her lover’s letter had been the first read. She had known his handwriting, and of course had read his the first. And as she had read it everything seemed to be of rose colour. Of course she had been filled with joy. Something had been done by the warnings of Miss Gregory, something, but not much, to weaken her strong faith in her lover. The major-general had been worldly and untrue, and it had been possible that her Philip should be as had been the major-general. There had been moments of doubt in which her heart had fainted a little; but as she read her lover’s words she acknowledged to herself how wrong she had been to faint at all. He declared it to be “a matter in which his own future happiness was altogether bound up.” And then there had been his playful allusion to her happiness, which was not the less pleasant to her because he had pretended to think that the “other person might be indifferent.” She pouted her lips at him, as though he were present while she was reading, with a joyous affectation of disdain. No, no; she could not consent to an immediate marriage at Avranches. There must be some delay. But she would write to him and explain all that. Then she read her aunt’s letter.</p>
				<p>It moved her very much. She had read it all twice before there came upon her a feeling of doubt, an acknowledgment to herself that she must reconsider the matter. But even when she was only reading it, before she had begun to consider, her former joy was repressed and almost quenched. So much of it was too true, terribly true. Of course her duty should be paramount. If she could persuade herself that duty required her to abandon Philip, she must abandon him, let the suffering to herself or to others be what it might. But then, what was it that duty required of her? “To sacrifice herself is the special heroism which a woman can achieve.” Yes, she believed that. But then, how about sacrificing Philip, who, no doubt, was telling the truth when he said that his own happiness was altogether bound up in his love?</p>
				<p>She was moved too by all that which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles said as to the grandeur of the Launay family. She had learned enough of the manners of Launay to be quite alive to the aristocratic idiosyncrasies of the old woman. She, Bessy Pryor, was nobody. It would have been well that Philip Launay should have founded his happiness on some girl of higher birth. But he had not done so. King Cophetua’s marriage had been recognised by the world at large. Philip was no more than King Cophetua, nor was she less than the beggar-girl. Like to like in marriages was no doubt expedient⁠—but not indispensable. And though she was not Philip’s equal, yet she was a lady. She would not disgrace him at his table, or among his friends. She was sure that she could be a comfort to him in his work.</p>
				<p>But the parts of the old woman’s letter which moved her most were those in which she gave full play to her own heart, and spoke, without reserve, of her own love for her dearest Bessy. “My days are heavy to bear because I have not my Bessy with me.” It was impossible to read this and not to have some desire to yield. How good this lady had been to her! Was it not through her that she had known Philip? But for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, what would her own life have been? She thought that had she been sure of Philip’s happiness, could she have satisfied herself that he would bear the blow, she would have done as she was asked. She would have achieved her heroism, and shown the strength of her gratitude, and would have taken her delight in administering to the comforts of her old friend⁠—only that Philip had her promise. All that she could possibly owe to all the world beside must be less, so infinitely less, than what she owed to him.</p>
				<p>She would have consulted Miss Gregory, but she knew so well what Miss Gregory would have advised. Miss Gregory would only have mentioned the major-general and her own experiences. Bessy determined, therefore, to lie awake and think of it, and to take no other counsellor beyond her own heart.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Answered the Two Letters, and What Came of It</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>The letters were read very often, and that from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles I think the oftener. Philip’s love was plainly expressed, and what more is expected from a lover’s letter than a strong, manly expression of love? It was quite satisfactory, declaring the one important fact that his happiness was bound up in hers. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles’ was the stronger letter, and by far the more suggestive. She had so mingled hardness and softness, had enveloped her stern lesson of feminine duty in so sweet a frame of personal love, that it was hardly possible that such a girl as Bessy Pryor should not be shaken by her arguments. There were moments during the night in which she had almost resolved to yield. “A woman can soar only by suffering.” She was not sure that she wanted to soar, but she certainly did want to do her duty, even though suffering should come of it. But there was one word in her aunt’s letter which militated against the writer’s purpose rather than assisted it. “Since you first came to me, you have never been false.” False! no; she hoped she had not been false. Whatever might be the duty of a man or a woman, that duty should be founded on truth. Was it not her special duty at this moment to be true to Philip? I do not know that she was altogether logical. I do not know but that in so supporting herself in her love there may have been a bias of personal inclination. Bessy perhaps was a little prone to think that her delight and her duty went together. But that flattering assurance, that she had never yet been false, strengthened her resolution to be true, now, to Philip.</p>
				<p>She took the whole of the next day to think, abstaining during the whole day from a word of confidential conversation with Miss Gregory. Then on the following morning she wrote her letters. That to Philip would be easily written. Words come readily when one has to give a hearty assent to an eager and welcome proposition. But to deny, to make denial to one loved and respected, to make denial of that which the loved one has a right to ask, must be difficult. Bessy, like a brave girl, went to the hard task first, and she rushed instantly at her subject, as a brave horseman rides at his fence without craning.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p><span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dearest Aunt</span>⁠—I cannot do as you bid me. My word to him is so sacred to me that I do not dare to break it. I cannot say that I won’t be his when I feel that I have already given myself to him.</p>
					<p>Dear, dearest aunt, my heart is very sad as I write this, because I feel that I am separating myself from you almost forever. You know that I love you. You know that I am miserable because you have banished me from your side. All the sweet kind words of your love to me are like daggers to me, because I cannot show my gratitude by doing as you would have me. It seems so hard! I know it is probable that I may never see him again, and yet I am to be separated from you, and you will be my enemy. In all the world there are but two that I really love. Though I cannot and will not give him up, I desire to be back at Launay now only that I might be with you. My love for him would be contented with a simple permission that it should exist. My love for you cannot be satisfied unless I am allowed to be close to you once again. You say that a woman’s duty consists in suffering. I am striving to do my duty, but I know how great is my suffering in doing it. However angry you may be with your Bessy, you will not think that she can appear even to be ungrateful without a pang.</p>
					<p>Though I will not give him up, you need not fear that I shall do anything. Should he come here I could not, I suppose, avoid seeing him, but I should ask him to go at once; and I should beg Miss Gregory to tell him that she could not make him welcome to her house. In all things I will do as though I were your daughter⁠—though I know so well how far I am from any right to make use of so dear a name!</p>
					<p>But dear, dear aunt, no daughter could love you better, nor strive more faithfully to be obedient.</p>
					<footer role="presentation">
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">I shall always be, even when you are most angry with me, your own, poor, loving, most affectionate</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Bessy.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The other letter need perhaps be not given in its entirety. Even in such a chronicle as this there seems to be something of treachery, something of a want of that forbearance to which young ladies are entitled, in making public the words of love which such a one may write to her lover. Bessy’s letter was no doubt full of love, but it was full of prudence also. She begged him not to come to Avranches. As to such a marriage as that of which he had spoken, it was, she assured him, quite impossible. She would never give him up, and so she had told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles. In that respect her duty to him was above her duty to her aunt. But she was so subject to her aunt that she would not in any other matter disobey her. For his sake⁠—for Philip’s sake⁠—only for Philip’s sake, she grieved that there should be more delay. Of course she was aware that it might possibly be a trouble in life too many for him to bear. In that case he might make himself free from it without a word of reproach from her. Of that he alone must be the judge. But, for the present, she could be no partner to any plans for the future. Her aunt had desired her to stay at Avranches, and at Avranches she must remain. There were words of love, no doubt; but the letter, taken altogether, was much sterner and less demonstrative of affection than that written to her aunt.</p>
				<p>There very soon came a rejoinder from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, but it was so curt and harsh as almost to crush Bessy by its laconic severity. “You are separated from me, and I am your enemy.” That was all. Beneath that one line the old woman had signed her name, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Miles, in large, plain angry letters. Bessy, who knew every turn of the woman’s mind, understood exactly how it had been with her when she wrote those few words, and when, with care, she had traced that indignant signature. “Then everything shall be broken, and though there was but one gleam of sunshine left to me, that gleam shall be extinguished. No one shall say that I, as Lady of Launay, did not do my duty.” It was thus the Lady of Launay had communed with herself when she penned that dreadful line. Bessy understood it all, and could almost see the woman as she wrote it.</p>
				<p>Then in her desolation she told everything to Miss Gregory⁠—showed the two former letters, showed that dreadful denunciation of lasting wrath, and described exactly what had been her own letter, both to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles and to her lover. Miss Gregory had but one recipe to offer in such a malady; that, namely, which she had taken herself in a somewhat similar sickness. The gentleman should be allowed to go forth into the world and seek a fitter wife, whereas Bessy should content herself, for the remainder of her life, with the pleasures of memory. Miss Gregory thought that it was much even to have been once loved by the major-general. When Bessy almost angrily declared that this would not be enough for her, Miss Gregory very meekly suggested that possibly affection might change in the lapse of years, and that some other suitor⁠—perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison⁠—might in course of time suffice. But at the idea Bessy became indignant, and Miss Gregory was glad to confine herself to the remedy pure and simple which she acknowledged to have been good for herself.</p>
				<p>Then there passed a month⁠—a month without a line from Launay or from Philip. That <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles should not write again was to be expected. She had declared her enmity, and there was an end of everything. During the month there had come a cheque to Miss Gregory from some man of business, and with the cheque there had been no intimation that the present arrangement was to be brought to a close. It appeared therefore that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, in spite of her enmity, intended to provide for the mutinous girl a continuation of the comforts which she now enjoyed. Certainly nothing more than this could have been expected from her. But, in regard to Philip, though Bessy had assured herself, and had assured Miss Gregory also, that she did not at all desire a correspondence in the present condition of affairs, still she felt so total a cessation of all tidings to be hard to bear. Mary Gregory, when writing to her aunt, said nothing of Philip⁠—merely remarked that Bessy Pryor would be glad to know that her aunt had nearly recovered her health, and was again able to go out among the poor. Then Bessy began to think⁠—not that Philip was like the major-general, for to that idea she would not give way at all⁠—but that higher and nobler motives had induced him to yield to his mother. If so she would never reproach him. If so she would forgive him in her heart of hearts. If so she would accept her destiny and entreat her old friend to allow her to return once more to Launay, and thenceforth to endure the evil thing which fate would have done to her in patient submission. If once the word should have come to her from Philip, then would she freely declare that everything should be over, then and for always, between her and her lover. After such suffering as that, while she was undergoing agony so severe, surely her friend would forgive her. That terrible word, “I am your enemy,” would surely then be withdrawn.</p>
				<p>But if it were to be so, if this was to be the end of her love, Philip, at least, would write. He would not leave her in doubt, after such a decision on his own part. That thought ought to have sustained her; but it was explained to her by Miss Gregory that the major-general had taken three months before he had been inspirited to send the fatal letter, and to declare his purpose of marrying money. There could be but little doubt, according to Miss Gregory, that Philip was undergoing the same process. It was, she thought, the natural end to such an affair. This was the kind of thing which young ladies without dowry, but with hearts to love, are doomed to suffer. There could be no doubt that Miss Gregory regarded the termination of the affair with a certain amount of sympathetic satisfaction. Could she have given Bessy all Launay, and her lover, she would have done so. But sadness and disappointment were congenial to her, and a heart broken, but still constant, was, to her thinking, a pretty feminine acquisition. She was to herself the heroine of her own romance, and she thought it good to be a heroine. But Bessy was indignant; not that Philip should be false, but that he should not dare to write and say so. “I think he ought to write,” was on her lips, when the door was opened, and, lo, all of a sudden, Philip Miles was in the room.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor’s Lover Argued His Case</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>We must now go back to Launay. It will be remembered that Bessy received both her letters on the same day⁠—those namely from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles and from Philip⁠—and that they both came from Launay. Philip had been sent away from the place when the fact of his declared love was first made known to the old lady, as though into a banishment which was to be perpetual till he should have repented of his sin. Such certainly had been his mother’s intention. He was to be sent one way, and the girl another, and everyone concerned was to be made to feel the terrible weight of her displeasure, till repentance and retractation should come. He was to be starved into obedience by a minimised allowance, and she by the weariness of her life at Avranches. But the person most grievously punished by these arrangements was herself. She had declared to herself that she would endure anything, everything, in the performance of her duty. But the desolation of her life was so extreme that it was very hard to bear. She did not shrink and tell herself that it was unendurable, but after awhile she persuaded herself that now that Bessy was gone there could be no reason why Philip also should be exiled. Would not her influence be more potent over Philip if he were at Launay? She therefore sent for him, and he came. Thus it was that the two letters were written from the same house.</p>
				<p>Philip obeyed his mother’s behest in coming as he had obeyed it in going; but he did not hesitate to show her that he felt himself to be aggrieved. Launay of course belonged to her. She could leave it and all the property to some hospital if she chose. He was well aware of that. But he had been brought up as the heir, and he could not believe that there should come such a ruin of heaven and earth as would be produced by any change in his mother’s intentions as to the Launay property. Touching his marriage, he felt that he had a right to marry whom he pleased, as long as she was a lady, and that any dictation from his mother in such a matter was a tyranny not to be endured. He had talked it all over with the rector before he went. Of course it was possible that his mother should commit such an injustice as that at which the rector hinted. “There are,” said Philip, “no bounds to possibilities.” It was, however, he thought, all but impossible; and whether probable or improbable, no fear of such tyranny should drive him from his purpose. He was a little magniloquent, perhaps, in what he said, but he was very resolved.</p>
				<p>It was, therefore, with some feeling of an injury inflicted upon him that he first greeted his mother on his return to the house. For a day or two not a word passed about Bessy. “Of course, I am delighted to be with you, and glad enough to have the shooting,” he said, in answer to some word of hers. “I shouldn’t have gone, as you know, unless you had driven me away.” This was hard on the old woman; but she bore it, and, for some days, was simply affectionate and gentle to her son⁠—more gentle than was her wont. Then she wrote to Bessy, and told her son that she was writing. “It is so impossible,” she said, “that I cannot conceive that Bessy should not obey me when she comes to regard it at a distance.”</p>
				<p>“I see no impossibility; but Bessy can, of course, do as she pleases,” replied Philip, almost jauntily. Then he determined that he also would write.</p>
				<p>There were no further disputes on the matter till Bessy’s answer came, and then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was very angry indeed. She had done her best so to write her letter that Bessy should be conquered both by the weight of her arguments and by the warmth of her love. If reason would not prevail, surely gratitude would compel her to do as she was bidden. But the very first words of Bessy’s letter contained a flat refusal. “I cannot do as you bid me.” Who was this girl, that had been picked out of a gutter, that she should persist in the right of becoming the mistress of Launay? In a moment the old woman’s love was turned into a feeling of condemnation, nearly akin to hatred. Then she sent off her short rejoinder, declaring herself to be Bessy’s enemy.</p>
				<p>On the following morning regret had come, and perhaps remorse. She was a woman of strong passion, subject to impulses which were, at the time, uncontrollable; but she was one who was always compelled by her conscience to quick repentance, and sometimes to an agonising feeling of wrong done by herself. To declare that Bessy was her enemy⁠—Bessy, who for so many years had prevented all her wishes, who had never been weary of well-doing to her, who had been patient in all things, who had been her gleam of sunshine, of whom she had sometimes said to herself in her closet that the child was certainly nearer to perfection than any other human being that she had known! True, it was not fit that the girl should become mistress of Launay! A misfortune had happened which must be cured⁠—if even by the severance of persons so dear to each other as she and her Bessy. But she knew that she had sinned in declaring one so good, and one so dear, to be her enemy.</p>
				<p>But what should she do next? Days went on and she did nothing. She simply suffered. There was no pretext on which she could frame an affectionate letter to her child. She could not write and ask to be forgiven for the harshness of her letter. She could not simply revoke the sentence she had pronounced without any reference to Philip and his love. In great misery, with a strong feeling of self-degradation because she had allowed herself to be violent in her wrath, she went on, repentant but still obstinate, till Philip himself forced the subject upon her.</p>
				<p>“Mother,” he said one day, “is it not time that things should be settled?”</p>
				<p>“What things, Philip?”</p>
				<p>“You know my intention.”</p>
				<p>“What intention?”</p>
				<p>“As to making Bessy my wife.”</p>
				<p>“That can never be.”</p>
				<p>“But it will be. It has to be. If as regards my own feelings I could bring myself to yield to you, how could I do so with honour in regard to her? But, for myself, nothing on earth would induce me to change my mind. It is a matter on which a man has to judge for himself, and I have not heard a word from you or from anyone to make me think that I have judged wrongly.”</p>
				<p>“Do birth and rank go for nothing?”</p>
				<p>He paused a moment, and then he answered her very seriously, standing up and looking down upon her as he did so. “For very much⁠—with me. I do not think that I could have brought myself to choose a wife, whatever might have been a woman’s charms, except among ladies. I found this one to be the chosen companion and dearest friend of the finest lady I know.” At this the old woman, old as she was, first blushed, and then, finding herself to be sobbing, turned her face away from him. “I came across a girl of whose antecedents I could be quite sure, of whose bringing up I knew all the particulars, as to whom I could be certain that every hour of her life had been passed among the best possible associations. I heard testimony as to her worth and her temper which I could not but believe. As to her outward belongings, I had eyes of my own to judge. Could I be wrong in asking such a one to be my wife? Can I be regarded as unhappy in having succeeded with her? Could I be acquitted of dishonour if I were to desert her? Shall I be held to be contemptible if I am true to her?”</p>
				<p>At every word he spoke he grew in her esteem. At this present crisis of her life she did not wish to think specially well of him, though he was her son, but she could not help herself. He became bigger before her than he had ever been before, and more of a man. It was, she felt, almost vain for a woman to lay her commands, either this way or that, upon a man who could speak to her as Philip had spoken.</p>
				<p>But not the less was the power in her hands. She could bid him go and marry⁠—and be a beggar. She could tell him that all Launay should go to his brother, and she could instantly make a will to that effect. So strong was the desire for masterdom upon her that she longed to do it. In the very teeth of her honest wish to do what was right, there was another wish⁠—a longing to do what she knew to be wrong. There was a struggle within, during which she strove to strengthen herself for evil. But it was vain. She knew of herself that were she to swear today to him that he was disinherited, were she to make a will before nightfall carrying out her threat, the pangs of conscience would be so heavy during the night that she would certainly change it all on the next morning. Of what use is a sword in your hand if you have not the heart to use it? Why seek to be turbulent with a pistol if your bosom be of such a nature that your finger cannot be forced to pull the trigger? Power was in her possession⁠—but she could not use it. The power rather was in her hands. She could not punish her boy, even though he had deserved it. She had punished her girl, and from that moment she had been crushed by torments, because of the thing that she had done. Others besides <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles have felt, with something of regret, that they have lacked the hardness necessary for cruelty and the courage necessary for its doing.</p>
				<p>“How shall it be, mother?” asked Philip. As she knew not what to answer she rose slowly from her chair, and leaving the room went to the seclusion of her own chamber.</p>
				<p>Days again passed before Philip renewed his question, and repeated it in the same words: “How shall it be, mother?” Wistfully she looked up at him, as though even yet something might be accorded by him to pity; as though the son might even yet be induced to accede to his mother’s prayers. It was not that she thought so. No. She had thought much, and was aware that it could not be so. But as a dog will ask with its eyes when it knows that asking is in vain, so did she ask. “One word from you, mother, will make us all happy.”</p>
				<p>“No; not all of us.”</p>
				<p>“Will not my happiness make you happy?” Then he stooped over her and kissed her forehead. “Could you be happy if you knew that I were wretched?”</p>
				<p>“I do not want to be happy. It should be enough that one does one’s duty.”</p>
				<p>“And what is my duty? Can it be my duty to betray the girl I love in order that I may increase an estate which is already large enough?”</p>
				<p>“It is for the family.”</p>
				<p>“What is a family but you, or I, or whoever for the moment may be its representative? Say that it shall be as I would have it, and then I will go to her and let her know that she may come back to your arms.”</p>
				<p>Not then, or on the next day, or on the next, did she yield; though she knew well during all these hours that it was her fate to yield. She had indeed yielded. She had confessed to herself that it must be so, and as she did so she felt once more the soft pressure of Bessy’s arms as they would cling round her neck, and she could see once more the brightness of Bessy’s eyes as the girl would hang over her bed early in the morning. “I do not want to be happy,” she had said; but she did want, sorely want, to see her girl. “You may go and tell her,” she said one night as she was preparing to go to her chamber. Then she turned quickly away, and was out of the room before he could answer her with a word.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Received Her Lover</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Miss Gregory was certainly surprised when, on the entrance of the young man, Bessy jumped from her chair and rushed into his arms. She knew that Bessy had no brother, and her instinct rather than her experience told her that the greeting which she saw was more than fraternal⁠—more than cousinly. She did not doubt but that the young man was Philip Launay, and knowing what she knew she was not disposed to make spoken complaints. But when Bessy lifted her face to be kissed, Miss Gregory became red and very uneasy. It is probable that she herself had never progressed as far as this with the young man who afterwards became the major-general.</p>
				<p>Bessy herself, had a minute been allowed to her for reflection, would have been less affectionate. She knew nothing of the cause which had brought Philip to Avranches. She only knew that her dear friend at Launay had declared her to be an enemy, and that she had determined that she could not, for years, become the wife of Philip Launay, without the consent of her who had used that cruel word. And at the moment of Philip’s entering the room her heart had been sore with reproaches against him. “He ought at any rate to write.” The words had been on her lips as the door had been opened, and the words had been spoken in the soreness of heart coming from a fear that she was to be abandoned.</p>
				<p>Then he was there. In the moment that sufficed for the glance of his eye to meet hers she knew that she was not abandoned. With whatever tidings he had come that was not to be the burden of his news. No man desirous of being released from his vows ever looked like that. So up she jumped and flew to him, not quite knowing what she intended, but filled with delight when she found herself pressed to his bosom. Then she had to remember herself, and to escape from his arms. “Philip,” she said, “this is Miss Gregory. Miss Gregory, I do not think you ever met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Launay.”</p>
				<p>Then Miss Gregory had to endeavour to look as though nothing particular had taken place⁠—which was a trial. But Bessy bore her part, if not without a struggle, at least without showing it. “And now, Philip,” she said, “how is my aunt?”</p>
				<p>“A great deal stronger than when you left her.”</p>
				<p>“Quite well?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; for her, I think I may say quite well.”</p>
				<p>“She goes out every day?”</p>
				<p>“Every day⁠—after the old plan. The carriage toddles round to the door at three, and then toddles about the parish at the rate of four miles an hour, and toddles home exactly at five. The people at Launay, Miss Gregory, don’t want clocks to tell them the hour in the afternoon.”</p>
				<p>“I do love punctuality,” said Miss Gregory.</p>
				<p>“I wish I were with her,” said Bessy.</p>
				<p>“I have come to take you,” said Philip.</p>
				<p>“Have you?” Then Bessy blushed⁠—for the first time. She blushed as a hundred various thoughts rushed across her mind. If he had been sent to take her back, sent by her aunt, instead of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, what a revulsion of circumstances must there not have been at Launay! How could it all have come to pass? Even to have been sent for at all, to be allowed to go back even in disgrace, would have been an inexpressible joy. Had Knowl come for her, with a grim look and an assurance that she was to be brought back because a prison at Launay was thought to be more secure than a prison at Avranches, the prospect of a return would have been hailed with joy. But now⁠—to be taken back by Philip to Launay! There was a whole heaven of delight in the thought of the very journey.</p>
				<p>Miss Gregory endeavoured to look pleased, but in truth the prospect to her was not so pleasant as to Bessy. She was to be left alone again. She was to lose her pensioner. After so short a fruition of the double bliss of society and pay, she was to be deserted without a thought. But to be deserted without many thoughts had been her lot in life, and now she bore her misfortune like a heroine. “You will be glad to go back to your aunt, Bessy; will you not?”</p>
				<p>“Glad!” The ecstasy was almost unkind, but poor Miss Gregory bore it, and maintained that pretty smile of gratified serenity as though everything were well with all of them.</p>
				<p>But Bessy felt that she had as yet heard nothing of the real news, and that the real news could not be told in the presence of Miss Gregory. It had not even yet occurred to her that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had actually given her sanction to the marriage. “This is a very pretty place,” said Philip.</p>
				<p>“What, Avranches?” said Miss Gregory, mindful of future possible pensioners. “Oh, delightful. It is the prettiest place in Normandy, and I think the most healthy town in all France.”</p>
				<p>“It seemed nice as I came up from the hotel. Suppose we go out for a walk, Bessy. We have to start back tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>“Tomorrow!” ejaculated Bessy. She would have been ready to go in half an hour had he demanded it.</p>
				<p>“If you can manage it. I promised my mother to be as quick as I could; and, when I arranged to come, I had ever so many engagements.”</p>
				<p>“If she must go tomorrow, she won’t have much time for walking,” said Miss Gregory, with almost a touch of anger in her voice. But Bessy was determined to have her walk. All her fate in life was to be disclosed to her within the next few minutes. She was already exultant, but she was beginning to think that there was a heaven, indeed, opening for her. So she ran away for her hat and gloves, leaving her lover and Miss Gregory together.</p>
				<p>“It is very sudden,” said the poor old lady with a gasp.</p>
				<p>“My mother felt that, and bade me tell you that, of course, the full twelvemonth⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I was not thinking about that,” said Miss Gregory. “I did not mean to allude to such a thing. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles has always been so kind to my brother, and anything I could have done I should have been so happy, without thinking of money. But⁠—” Philip sat with the air of an attentive listener, so that Miss Gregory could get no answer to her question without absolutely asking it. “But there seems to be a change.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, there is a change, Miss Gregory.”</p>
				<p>“We were afraid that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had been offended.”</p>
				<p>“It is the old story, Miss Gregory. Young people and old people very often will not think alike: but it is the young people who generally have their way.”</p>
				<p>She had not had her way. She remembered that at the moment. But then, perhaps, the major-general had had his. When a period of life has come too late for success, when all has been failure, the expanding triumphs of the glorious young, grate upon the feelings even of those who are generous and self-denying. Miss Gregory was generous by nature and self-denying by practice, but Philip’s paean and Bessy’s wondrous prosperity were for a moment a little hard upon her. There had been a comfort to her in the conviction that Philip was no better than the major-general. “I suppose it is so,” she said. “That is, if one of them has means.”</p>
				<p>“Exactly.”</p>
				<p>“But if they are both poor, I don’t see how their being young can enable them to live upon nothing.” She intended to imply that Philip probably would have been another major-general, but that he was heir to Launay.</p>
				<p>Philip, who had never heard of the major-general, was a little puzzled; nevertheless, he acceded to the proposition, not caring, however, to say anything as to his own circumstances on so very short an acquaintance.</p>
				<p>Then Bessy came down with her hat, and they started for their walk. “Now tell me all about it,” she said, in a fever of expectation, as soon as the front door was closed behind them.</p>
				<p>“There is nothing more to tell,” said he.</p>
				<p>“Nothing more?”</p>
				<p>“Unless you want me to say that I love you.”</p>
				<p>“Of course I do.”</p>
				<p>“Well, then⁠—I love you. There!”</p>
				<p>“Philip, you are not half nice to me.”</p>
				<p>“Not after coming all the way from Launay to say that?”</p>
				<p>“There must be so much to tell me? Why has my aunt sent for me?”</p>
				<p>“Because she wants you.”</p>
				<p>“And why has she sent you?”</p>
				<p>“Because I want you too.”</p>
				<p>“But does she want me?”</p>
				<p>“Certainly she does.”</p>
				<p>“For you?” If he could say this, then everything would have been said. If he could say this truly, then everything would have been done necessary for the perfection of her happiness. “Oh, Philip, do tell me. It is so strange that she should send for me! Do you know what she said to me in her last letter? It was not a letter. It was only a word. She said that I was her enemy.”</p>
				<p>“All that is changed.”</p>
				<p>“She will be glad to have me again?”</p>
				<p>“Very glad. I fancy that she has been miserable without you.”</p>
				<p>“I shall be as glad to be with her again, Philip. You do not know how I love her. Think of all she has done for me!”</p>
				<p>“She has done something now that I hope will beat everything else.”</p>
				<p>“What has she done?”</p>
				<p>“She has consented that you and I shall be man and wife. Isn’t that more than all the rest?”</p>
				<p>“But has she? Oh, Philip, has she really done that?”</p>
				<p>Then at last he told his whole story. Yes; his mother had yielded. From the moment in which she had walked out of the room, having said that he might “go and tell her,” she had never endeavoured to renew the fight. When he had spoken to her, endeavouring to draw from her some warmth of assent, she had generally been very silent. She had never brought herself absolutely to wish him joy. She had not as yet so crucified her own spirit in the matter as to be able to tell him that he had chosen his wife well; but she had shown him in a hundred ways that her anger was at an end, and that if any feeling was left opposed to his own happiness, it was simply one of sorrow. And there were signs which made him think that even that was not deep-seated. She would pat him, stroking his hair, and leaning on his shoulder, administering to his comforts with a nervous accuracy as to little things which was peculiar to her. And then she gave him an infinity of directions as to the way in which it would be proper that Bessy should travel, being anxious at first to send over a maid for her behoof⁠—not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, but a younger woman, who would have been at Bessy’s command. Philip, however, objected to the maid. And when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles remarked that if it was Bessy’s fate to become mistress of Launay, Bessy ought to have a maid to attend her, Philip said that that would be very well a month or two hence, when Bessy would have become⁠—not mistress of Launay, which was a place which he trusted might not be vacant for many a long day⁠—but first lieutenant to the mistress, by right of marriage. He refused altogether to take the maid with him, as he explained to Bessy with much laughter. And so they came to understand each other thoroughly, and Bessy knew that the great trouble of her life, which had been as a mountain in her way, had disappeared suddenly, as might some visionary mountain. And then, when they thoroughly understood each other, they started back to England and to Launay together.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-lady-of-launay-chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">How Bessy Pryor Was Brought Back, and What Then Became of Her</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p>Bessy understood the condition of the old woman much better than did her son. “I am sad a little,” she said, on her way home, “because of her disappointment.”</p>
				<p>“Sad, because she is to have you⁠—you yourself⁠—for her daughter-in-law?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, indeed, Philip; because I know that she has not wanted me. She will be kind because I shall belong to you, and perhaps partly because she loves me; but she will always regret that that young lady down in Cornwall has not been allowed to add to the honour and greatness of the family. The Launays are everything to her, and what can I do for the Launays?” Of course he said many pretty things to her in answer to this, but he could not eradicate from her mind the feeling that, in regard to the old friend who had been so kind to her, she was returning evil for good.</p>
				<p>But even Bessy did not quite understand the old woman. When she found that she had yielded, there was disappointment in the old woman’s heart. Who can have indulged in a certain longing for a lifetime, in a special ambition, and seen that ambition and that longing crushed and trampled on, without such a feeling? And she had brought this failure on herself⁠—by her own weakness, as she told herself. Why had she given way to Bessy and to Bessy’s blandishments? It was because she had not been strong to do her duty that this ruin had fallen upon her hopes. The power in her own hands had been sufficient. But for her Philip need never have seen Bessy Pryor. Might not Bessy Pryor have been sent somewhere out of the way when it became evident that she had charms of her own with which to be dangerous? And even after the first evil had been done her power had been sufficient. She need not have sent for Philip back. She need have written no letter to Bessy. She might have been calm and steady in her purpose, so that there should have been no violent ebullition of anger⁠—so violent as to induce repentance, and with repentance renewed softness and all the pangs of renewed repentance.</p>
				<p>When Philip had left her on his mission to Normandy her heart was heavy with regret, and heavy also with anger. But it was with herself that she was angry. She had known her duty and she had not done it. She had known her duty, and had neglected it⁠—because Bessy had been soft to her, and dear, and pleasant. It was here that Bessy did not quite understand her friend. Bessy reproached herself because she had made to her friend a bad return to all the kindness she had received. The old woman would not allow herself to entertain any such a thought. Once she had spoken to herself of having warmed a serpent in her bosom; but instantly, with infinite self-scorn, she had declared to herself that Bessy was no serpent. For all that she had done for Bessy, Bessy had made ample return, the only possible return that could be full enough. Bessy had loved her. She too had loved Bessy, but that should have had no weight. Though they two had been linked together by their very heartstrings, it had been her duty to make a severance because their joint affection had been dangerous. She had allowed her own heart to override her own sense of duty, and therefore she was angry⁠—not with Bessy, but with herself.</p>
				<p>But the thing was done. To quarrel with Philip had been impossible to her. One feeling coming upon another, her own repentance, her own weakness, her acknowledgment of a certain man’s strength on the part of her son, had brought her to such a condition that she had yielded. Then it was natural that she should endeavour to make the best of it. But even the doing of that was a trial to her. When she told herself that as far as the woman went, the mere woman, Philip could not have found a better wife had he searched the world all round, she found that she was being tempted from her proper path even in that. What right could she have to look for consolation there? For other reasons, which she still felt to be adequate, she had resolved that something else should be done. That something else had not been done, because she had failed in her duty. And now she was trying to salve the sore by the very poison which had created the wound. Bessy’s sweet temper, and Bessy’s soft voice, and Bessy’s bright eye, and Bessy’s devotion to the delight of others, were all so many temptations. Grovelling as she was in sackcloth and ashes because she had yielded to them, how could she console herself by a prospect of these future enjoyments either for herself or her son?</p>
				<p>But there were various duties to which she could attend, grievously afflicted as she was by her want of attention to that great duty. As Fate had determined that Bessy Pryor was to become mistress of Launay, it was proper that all Launay should know and recognise its future mistress. Bessy certainly should not be punished by any want of earnestness in this respect. No one should be punished but herself. The new mistress should be made as welcome as though she had been the red-haired girl from Cornwall. Knowl was a good deal put about because <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, remembering a few hard words which Knowl had allowed herself to use in the days of the imprisonment, became very stern. “It is settled that Miss Pryor is to become <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Philip Launay, and you will obey her just as myself.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knowl, who had saved a little money, began to consider whether it would not be as well to retire into private life.</p>
				<p>When the day came on which the two travellers were to reach Launay <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles was very much disturbed in her mind. In what way should she receive the girl? In her last communication⁠—her very last⁠—she had called Bessy her enemy; and now Bessy was being brought home to be made her daughter-in-law under her own roof. How sweet it would be to stand at the door and welcome her in the hall, among all the smiling servants, to make a tender fuss and hovering over her, as would be so natural with a mother-in-law who loved an adopted daughter as tenderly as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles loved Bessy! How pleasant to take her by the hand and lead her away into some inner sanctum where warm kisses as between mother and child would be given and taken; to hear her praises of Philip, and then to answer again with other praises; to tell her with words half serious and half drollery that she must now buckle on her armour and do her work, and take upon herself the task of managing the household! There was quite enough of softness in the old woman to make all this delightful. Her imagination revelled in thinking of it even at the moment in which she was telling herself that it was impossible. But it was impossible. Were she to force such a change upon herself Bessy would not believe in the sincerity of the change. She had told Bessy that she was her enemy!</p>
				<p>At last the carriage which had gone to the station was here; not the wagonette on this occasion, but the real carriage itself, the carriage which was wont to toddle four miles an hour about the parish. “This is an honour meant for the prodigal daughter,” said Philip, as he took his seat. “If you had never been naughty, we should only have had the wagonette, and we then should have been there in half the time.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles, when she heard the wheels on the gravel, was even yet uncertain where she would place herself. She was fluttered, moving about from the room into the hall and back, when the old butler spoke a careful word: “Go into the library, madam, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Philip will bring her to you there.” Then she obeyed the butler⁠—as she had probably never done in her life before.</p>
				<p>Bessy, as soon as her step was off the carriage, ran very quickly into the house. “Where is my aunt?” she said. The butler was there showing the way, and in a moment she had thrown her arms round the old woman. Bessy had a way of making her kisses obligatory, from which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles had never been able to escape. Then, when the old woman was seated, Bessy was at once upon her knees before her. “Say that you love me, aunt. Say that at once! Say that first of all!”</p>
				<p>“You know I love you.”</p>
				<p>“I know I love you. Oh, I am so glad to have you again. It was so hard not to be with you when I thought that you were ill. I did not know how sick it would make me to be away from you.” Neither then nor at any time afterwards was there a word spoken on the one side or the other as to that declaration of enmity.</p>
				<p>There was nothing then said in way of explanation. There was nothing perhaps necessary. It was clear to Bessy that she was received at Launay as Philip’s future wife⁠—not only by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles herself, but by the whole household⁠—and that all the honours of the place were to be awarded to her without stint. For herself that would have sufficed. To her any explanation of the circumstances which had led to a change so violent was quite unnecessary. But it was not so with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Miles herself. She could not but say some word in justification of herself⁠—in excuse rather than justification. She had Bessy into her bedroom that night, and said the word, holding between her two thin hands the hand of the girl she addressed. “You have known, Bessy, that I did not wish this.” Bessy muttered that she did know it. “And I think you knew why.”</p>
				<p>“How could I help it, aunt?”</p>
				<p>Upon this the old woman patted the hand. “I suppose he could not help it. And, if I had been a young man, I could not have helped it. I could not help it as I was, though I am an old woman. I think I am as foolish as he is.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps he is foolish, but you are not.”</p>
				<p>“Well; I do not know. I have my misgivings about that, my dear. I had objects which I thought were sacred and holy, to which I had been wedded through many years. They have had to be thrust aside.”</p>
				<p>“Then you will hate me!”</p>
				<p>“No, my child; I will love you with all my heart. You will be my son’s wife now, and, as such, you will be dear to me, almost as he is dear. And you will still be my own Bessy, my gleam of sunlight, without whom the house is so gloomy that it is like a prison to me. For myself, do you think I could want any other young woman about the house than my own dear Bessy;⁠—that any other wife for Philip could come as near my heart as you do?”</p>
				<p>“But if I have stood in the way?”</p>
				<p>“We will not think of it any more. You, at any rate, need not think of it,” added the old woman, as she remembered all the circumstances. “You shall be made welcome with all the honours and all the privileges due to Philip’s wife; and if there be a regret, it shall never trouble your path. It may be a comfort to you to hear me say that you, at least, in all things have done your duty.” Then, at last, there were more tears, more embracings, and, before either of them went to their rest, a perfect ecstasy of love.</p>
				<p>Little or nothing more is necessary for the telling of the story of the Lady of Launay. Before the autumn had quite gone, and the last tint had left the trees, Bessy Pryor became Bessy Launay, under the hand of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gregory, in the Launay parish church. Everyone in the neighbourhood around was there, except <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morrison, who had taken this opportunity of having a holiday and visiting Switzerland. But even he, when he returned, soon became reconciled to the arrangement, and again became a guest in the dining-room of the mansion. I hope I shall have no reader who will not think that Philip Launay did well in not following the example of the major-general.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
